arXiv:2510.15672v2 [hep-ex] 18 Nov 2025

Evaluation of Novel Fast Machine Learning
Algorithms for Knowledge-Distillation-Based Anomaly
Detection at CMS
Lino Gerlach∗
Princeton University
lg0508@princeton.edu

Elliott Kauffman∗
Princeton University
ek8842@princeton.edu

Abhishikth Mallampalli∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
amallampalli@wisc.edu

Abstract
The CICADA (Calorimeter Image Convolutional Anomaly Detection Algorithm)
project aims to detect anomalous physics signatures without bias from theoretical
models in proton–proton collisions at the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider. CICADA identifies anomalies in low-level calorimeter trigger data using
a convolutional autoencoder, whose behavior is transferred to compact student
models via knowledge distillation. Careful model design and quantization ensure
sub-200 ns inference times on FPGAs. We investigate novel student model architectures that employ differentiable relaxations to enable extremely fast inference
at the cost of slower training—a welcome tradeoff in the knowledge distillation
context. Evaluated on CMS open data and under emulated FPGA conditions, these
models achieve comparable anomaly detection performance to classically quantized baselines with significantly reduced resource usage. The savings in resource
usage enable the possibility to look at a richer input granularity.

1

Introduction

At CERN’s Large Hadron Collider (LHC), tens of millions of proton-proton collisions are
produced per second. The Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) detector at the LHC captures complex
high-dimensional data from each collision. With such large data volume and rate, it is imperative
to have an effective data reduction strategy. The Level-1 Trigger (L1T) in the CMS experiment
is the first data reduction step, bringing the event rate from 40 MHz to 100 kHz — a 99.75%
reduction within 3.8 microseconds [1][2]. The L1T is comprised of real-time algorithms built on
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). Traditional physics-process oriented triggers are highly
efficient for specific, known signal signatures but are inherently inflexible, rendering them ineffective
for broad searches for unknown phenomena. Conversely, more general physics object-oriented
triggers capture a wider variety of signals but must impose high momentum thresholds to control data
rates, severely limiting their acceptance for new physics involving low-energy particles. To broaden
the search for new physics to more possibilities, CMS has implemented two Machine Learning
(ML)-based anomaly detection algorithms in the L1T: “Calorimeter Image Convolutional Anomaly
Detection Algorithm” (CICADA) [3] and “Anomaly Extraction Online L1 Trigger Lightweight”
(AXOL1TL) [4]. These new triggers aim to provide an optimal tradeoff by having a low data rate
while maintaining a wider reach, all within the demanding, low-latency environment of the L1T, see
Fig. 1.
Our contribution focuses on CICADA, which deploys a convolutional autoencoder that is
trained on CMS Zero Bias data, which is a random trigger that selects events with no bias towards
any physics signature.
*

Equal contribution.

Machine Learning and the Physical Sciences Workshop, NeurIPS 2025.

1.1

Our contribution

This paper explores three different quantization schemes that aim to reduce the resources required to
run the CICADA algorithm without sacrificing performance. We show that two novel quantization
libraries (HGQ, LGN) offer a vastly superior trade-off between physics performance and resource
efficiency compared to the established QKeras baseline. This resource saving directly benefits the
LHC physics program by enabling the deployment of more complex real-time algorithms — for
example, analyzing calorimeter energy deposits at finer spatial granularity than previously possible —
while meeting CMS’s stringent real-time data selection constraints. We also utilize CMS Open Data
to ensure the project’s reach to the broader community [5].

2

Background

The input to the autoencoder is an 18ϕ × 14η unrolled cylindrical grid of calorimeter energy deposits,
as shown in Fig. 2. Here, ϕ refers to the azimuthal angle with respect to the proton beamline and η
refers to the a pseudorapidity (effecitvely the polar angle). The reconstruction loss is defined as the
mean squared error (MSE) of the transverse energy deposits (ET ) in the input and output ϕ × η grid:
252
2
1 X  original
reconstructed
loss =
ET,i − ET,i
(1)
252 i=1
This value is used to define the anomaly score, based on the principle that the autoencoder will
reconstruct rare physics processes less accurately than the bulk of Zero Bias data it was trained on.

Figure 1: Data rate vs. latency requirements across various scientific
and industrial applications.

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of the topology of CICADA’s
inputs. The energy deposits on the unrolled cylindrical
calorimeter are image-like data.

This autoencoder model consists of around 300k parameters and therefore cannot be deployed within
the FPGA-based L1T. To solve this problem, CICADA employs a knowledge distillation strategy,
in which the autoencoder is treated as a “teacher" model and a much smaller, ∼10k parameter
convolutional neural network acts as a “student" [6]. The student model is trained to learn a soft
target from the teacher model (the anomaly score) from the original 18ϕ × 14η input, using the Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) loss function. The soft target is defined from the teacher reconstruction loss
as:
Qlog := quantize (log (32 · loss))
(2)
This transformation of the loss reduces the range of the targets to assist in training and makes use of
the fixed bit-width requirement of the trigger system. Since the teacher model is trained on Zero Bias
data and thus will result in only low anomaly scores, the student model is exposed to events with a
known high anomaly score so that it can sufficiently learn the characteristics of high-score events.
This process is known as outlier exposure. To optimize for low-precision inference on hardware, the
student model was trained with quantization-aware training (QAT) using QKeras [7]. The trained
QKeras student model was then translated into synthesizable C++ code with hls4ml. hls4ml inserts
pragmas into the code to optimize the high-level synthesis [8]. The C++ code was further fine-tuned
in order to meet the resource and latency requirements imposed by the trigger system.
2

3

Methods and Experimental Setup

3.1

Quantization Schemes

HGQ The High Granularity Quantization (HGQ) library [9] offers a more fine-grained approach
to model compression than QKeras, which operates at the layer level. HGQ achieves this sub-layer
granularity by treating the bitwidths of individual weights and biases as trainable parameters. To
optimize these bitwidths, HGQ employs a two-pronged strategy within the loss function. First,
it intentionally minimizes a proxy for hardware cost by introducing a term called Effective Bit
Operations (EBOPs), which is proportional to the number of bitwise operations in the network.
Second, it adds an L1 regularization penalty directly to the bitwidth parameters, which explicitly
pushes them towards lower values. The EBOPs and L1 terms are weighted by the hyperparameters β
and γ, respectively, controlling the trade-off between model accuracy and resource efficiency. By
minimizing this combined loss, the training process simultaneously learns the optimal value for each
weight and its ideal bitwidth, automatically pruning connections by learning a bitwidth of zero.
LGN Another strategy for fast and small CICADA student models is by changing the architecture to
a logic gate network (LGN). LGNs are comprised of binary logic gates accepting only two inputs, so
they can execute very quickly. To enable gradient-based training, differentiable functions are used as
substitutes for the logic gates. Upon inference, each neuron is collapsed to the logic gate with the
highest probability [10][11], leading to multiplication-free and extremely efficient deployment on
hardware.

3.2

Experimental design

Dataset Our study is conducted entirely using public CMS Open Data to ensure reproducibility and
enable further community-driven research. The model is trained on the 2017 Zero Bias proton-proton
collision dataset, which serves as the background distribution. As a signal sample, we use top quark
pair production (tt̄), which has three possible final states characterized by number of leptons (l),
neutrinos (ν), and quarks (q). The tt̄ → 2l + 2ν sample is split into three sets: two are used for outlier
exposure during training and validation, while the third is reserved for the final evaluation. The other
two samples, tt̄ → l + ν + 2q and tt̄ → 4q, are used exclusively for evaluation. These processes were
chosen as they are the only relevant physics signals available in the open data collection. Additionally,
tt̄ processes have a much lower cross-section than the majority of processes present in the Zero
Bias dataset, meaning that they happen at a comparatively negligible rate, so that they should be
anomalous with respect to the majority of events.
Experiments To explore the trade-off between performance and resource usage, we performed a
hyperparameter scan for both HGQ and LGN. For HGQ, multiple student models were trained by
varying the β parameter in the loss function, while γ remained at the default value, 1e-8. For LGN,
multiple student models with different architectures as well as different bit representations for the
input data were trained.
Performance was evaluated using a number of metrics. First, the teacher and student model scores
were compared using the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) to assess how well the student model learned
the target teacher anomaly scores. Then, the physics performance was quantified using the Receiver
Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve (ROC AUC) to measure the trade-off between signal
efficiency and background rejection. It is worth noting that a typical CMS L1T algorithm will operate
at very low false positive rates (« 1 ‰) to achieve the required data rate reduction.
Hardware Cost was estimated by synthesizing each model onto the target FPGA platform, an
AMD Virtex-7 (XC7VX690T) FPGA, using Vitis HLS [12, 13]. The synthesis reports provide key
implementation metrics: resource utilization, measured in Look-Up Tables (LUTs), Flip-Flops (FFs),
and Digital Signal Processors (DSPs), as well as the processing latency, expressed in the number of
FPGA clock cycles required for a single inference. For the HGQ model, the hls4ml framework was
used to generate HLS-compatible code. For the LGN, the structure was directly translared into C
code for HLS synthesis. This was, however, only achieved for dense architectures. Synthesis for
convolutional LGNs is work in progress.
3

4

Results

Figure 3 shows the classifying performance of selected
CICADA models in the form of ROC curves. It can be
seen that the convolutional LGN (CLGN), as well as the
HGQ-based student with adaptive regularization (HGQmixed) achieve comparable performance to the baseline
(QKeras). For the most important regime with trigger
rates below 1kHz, the novel methods even outperform
the baseline. Figure 4 (left) shows the EMD as a function of EBOPs (EBOPs ≈ #LUTs + 55 ∗ #DSPs),
which was found to be a good estimate for the final resource count, after the place-and-route stage [9]. EMD
is reported for three datasets: Zero Bias, tt̄ → 4q, and
tt̄ → l + ν + 2q. The HGQ student models generally
achieve comparable or sometimes lower EMD than the
QKeras model, demonstrating strong fidelity in learning
the teacher outputs. The dense LGN student (LGN-LT2) Figure 3: ROC curves for the two simlearns the Zero Bias sample reasonably well but strug- ulated signal samples. The teacher, the
gles with the signal datasets, likely because the limited baseline student and three selected novel
number of high-value outliers in the training set is in- student models are shown. On the x-axis,
sufficient given the binary input representation required. the trigger rate is shown which is proporThe convolutional LGN overcomes this issue, but its tional to the false positive rate.
synthesis for FPGA is work-in-progress. The number of
logic gates is, however, comparable to the dense architecture shown here. HGQ models also maintain
slightly lower resource usage while achieving similar physics performance, as illustrated in the ROC
AUC versus EBOPs plot (right). Table 1 shows the resource utilization estimates in detail.

Figure 4: Performance results for the different CICADA student models given as a function of
resource utilization calculated in EPOPs. Any given model lies along a vertical line. On the left, the
EMD between the targets from the teacher and the students’ prediction is shown. On the right, the
ROC-AUC for two simulated signals is shown. The teacher achieved ROC-AUCs of 0.81 and 0.85 on
the tt̄ → l + ν + 2q and tt̄ → 4q signals, respectively.

Table 1: Pre-place-and-route hardware cost comparison for select student models. Latency is reported
in clock cycles (cc), where one cycle is 6.25 ns.
Model Label
QKeras
HGQ-1E-5
HGQ-1E-4
HGQ-mixed
LGN-LT2

Quantization Library
QKeras
HGQ
HGQ
HGQ
LGN

Latency (in cc)
16
17
11
8
3

4

DSPs
697
4
1
0
0

FFs
50368
27776
6229
3019
856

LUTs
159447
111848
38111
24947
19977

HGQ EBOPs
39170
7570
3301
-

5

Limitations and Future work

The results presented here serve as a proof of concept, and we anticipate that performance can be
further enhanced through a detailed exploration of synthesis parameters. We are working on further
improving the performance of the students using these novel quantization methods. Although resource
utilization estimates are provided in this paper, performing place-and-route is required to determine
the real hardware cost of the student models. Future work also includes synthesis of convolutional
LGNs that demonstrate great accuracy, but for which we do not have resource estimates, yet [11].

6

Broader Impact

By demonstrating a substantial reduction in hardware requirements without compromising physics
performance, this work opens the door to deploying more sophisticated machine learning algorithms
within the stringent real-time constraints of the CMS L1 Trigger and CICADA. For instance, it now
becomes feasible to incorporate additional input features that encode finer details of upstream energy
distributions, as well as to enable real-time monitoring for potential input drifts. These advances
have the potential to enhance searches for new physics by improving the trade-off between signal
efficiency and background rejection.
Beyond the CICADA use case, the demonstrated feasibility of the two novel fast machine learning
approaches carries broader significance. Fast ML on resource-constrained hardware is of growing
importance for future high-energy physics (HEP) experiments, where tasks such as real-time particle
track reconstruction are critical. This applies not only to the HL-LHC, but also to future facilities such
as the FCC and potential muon colliders. Traditional optimization techniques—such as fixed-precision
quantization and pruning—are unlikely to fully meet the demands imposed by next-generation data
rates. Hence, more innovative and radical solutions, like the ones explored here, will be essential.
The methods and findings presented in this study thus lay important groundwork for future efforts in
fast ML, both within HEP and in other real-time data-intensive domains.

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

CMS TriDAS project: Technical Design Report, Volume 1: The Trigger Systems. Technical
design report. CMS. URL: https://cds.cern.ch/record/706847.
A Tapper and Darin Acosta. CMS Technical Design Report for the Level-1 Trigger Upgrade.
Tech. rep. Additional contacts: Jeffrey Spalding, Fermilab, Jeffrey.Spalding@cern.ch Didier
Contardo, Universite Claude Bernard-Lyon I, didier.claude.contardo@cern.ch. 2013. URL:
https://cds.cern.ch/record/1556311.
CMS Collaboration. Model-Independent Real-Time Anomaly Detection at the CMS Level-1
Calorimeter Trigger with CICADA. CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-121.
Available at: https://cds.cern.ch/record/2917884. CERN, Nov. 2024.
CMS Collaboration. 2024 Data Collected with AXOL1TL Anomaly Detection at the CMS
Level-1 Trigger. CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-059. Available at:
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2904695. CERN, Nov. 2024.
CMS Data preservation and open access group. CERN Open Data Portal. https://opendata.
cern.ch/. Accessed: 2025-08-30. 2025.
Adrian Alan Pol et al. Knowledge Distillation for Anomaly Detection. 2023. arXiv: 2310.
06047 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06047.
Claudionor N. Coelho et al. “Automatic heterogeneous quantization of deep neural networks
for low-latency inference on the edge for particle detectors”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence
3.8 (2021), pp. 675–686.
Javier Duarte et al. “Fast inference of deep neural networks in FPGAs for particle physics”.
In: JINST 13.07 (2018), P07027. DOI: 10 . 1088 / 1748 - 0221 / 13 / 07 / P07027. arXiv:
1804.06913 [physics.ins-det].
Sun Chang et al. Gradient-based Automatic Per-Weight Mixed Precision Quantization for
Neural Networks On-Chip. en. 2024. DOI: 10.7907/HQ8JD-RHG30. URL: https://authors.
library.caltech.edu/doi/10.7907/hq8jd-rhg30.
Felix Petersen et al. Deep Differentiable Logic Gate Networks. 2022. arXiv: 2210.08277
[cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08277.
5

[11] Felix Petersen et al. “Convolutional differentiable logic gate networks”. In: Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS ’24.
Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Associates Inc., 2025. ISBN: 9798331314385.
[12] Xilinx Inc. Xilinx Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Release Notes, Installation, and Licensing. Version 2021.1. San Jose, CA, June 2021. URL: https : / / www . xilinx . com /
support / documentation / sw _ manuals / xilinx2021 _ 1 / ug973 - vivado - release notes-install-license.pdf.
[13] Xilinx Inc. Xilinx Vitis High-Level Synthesis User Guide. Version 2021.1. San Jose, CA,
June 2021. URL: https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/
xilinx2021_1/ug1399-vitis-hls.pdf.

A

Existing CICADA Architectures

The teacher model for CICADA is a convolutional autoencoder that follows the architecture outlined
in Fig. 5. The encoding step comprises two convolutional layers followed by a dense layer, which
compresses the input into the low-dimensional latent space. The decoding step follows these steps
in reverse. The currently implemented student model on which this paper attempts to improve is a
much smaller convolutional autoencoder, quantized using QKeras. The student model follows the
architecture outlined in Fig. 6.

Figure 5: CICADA teacher model architecture.

Figure 6: CICADA legacy student model architecture.
Figure 7: The numbers at the convolutional layers represent the number of filters used in each layer
(e.g., 20, 30), while the numbers at the dense layers indicate the number of nodes in each fully
connected layer (e.g., 1890, 80).

B

Data Representation for LGN Models

During training, the LGN architecture can handle float inputs, since each logic gate is represented
as a continuous function. However, the compiled model uses discrete logic gates in place of the
continuous functions and can therefore only accept binary inputs. The schema for representing
the 18ϕ × 14η integer input grid in binary form during training and for the compiled model has a
large effect on the quality of anomaly score reconstruction. This allows values between 0 and 1
while training, such that when the inputs are collapsed to binary values upon compiling the model,
important information is retained.
The bit representation lt2 follow a log transformation function. Let x be the input and {ti }2i=1 be a
list of thresholds. Then the transformation is calculated as:

max(x − ti , 0) 
, i = 1, . . . , 2
(3)
yi = log 1 +
2
6

Different thresholds and number of thresholds are selected for different student models. The untransformed inputs range from 0 to 256, but high values are extremely rare in the input dataset. The
threshold values are therefore chosen as [0, 2] to reflect this.

C

Source Code

The source code to reproduce the results can be found on GitHub:
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ml4physics-paper-plots-7C16/.
Our implementation of
logic gate networks is publicly available on GitHub: https://github.com/ligerlac/torchlogix

7

