EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

CERN-EP-2025-282
2026/01/27

arXiv:2601.17544v1 [hep-ex] 24 Jan 2026

CMS-EXO-23-016

Strategy and performance of the CMS long-lived particle
trigger program√
in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13.6 TeV
The CMS Collaboration*

Abstract
In the physics program of the CMS experiment during the CERN LHC Run 3, which
started in 2022, the long-lived particle triggers have been improved and extended
to expand the scope of the corresponding searches. These dedicated triggers and
their performance are described in this paper, using several theoretical benchmark
models that extend the standard model of particle physics. The results are based on
proton-proton collision data collected with the CMS detector during 2022–2024 at a
center-of-mass energy of 13.6 TeV, corresponding to integrated luminosities of up to
123 fb−1 .
Submitted to Physics Reports

© 2026 CERN for the benefit of the CMS Collaboration. CC-BY-4.0 license
* See Appendix A for the list of collaboration members

Contents

1

Contents
1
2
3
4

5
6

7
8
9
A
A

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The CMS detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The CMS trigger system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Offline and online event reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1
The particle-flow algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2
Tracking and vertexing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3
Muons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4
Electrons and photons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5
Jets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.6
Tau leptons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.7
Hadrons, energy sums, and missing transverse momentum . . . . . . . .
Data and simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-lived particle trigger algorithms and efficiencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1
Summary of new long-lived particle triggers for Run 3 . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2
Tracker-based algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.1
The pmiss
T -based disappearing-track triggers . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.2
Displaced-tau triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2.3
Displaced-jet triggers using the tracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3
Calorimeter-based algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3.1
Displaced-jet triggers using the HCAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3.2
Delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3.3
Delayed-diphoton triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3.4
Displaced-photon + HT triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4
Muon spectrometer-based algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.1
Displaced single-muon and dimuon triggers . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.2
Double displaced L3 muon triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.3
Displaced L3 muon + photon triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.4
Dimuon scouting triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.5
Muon detector shower triggers with the CSCs . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4.6
Muon detector shower triggers with the DTs . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5
The No-BPTX algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5.1
Jet No-BPTX triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5.2
Muon No-BPTX triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-lived particle trigger acceptances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-lived particle triggers at the High-Luminosity LHC . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Glossary of acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The CMS Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2
3
5
8
8
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
18
19
21
21
25
28
31
31
38
41
45
46
46
54
55
56
61
63
64
65
66
66
73
75
88
89

2

1

Introduction

While the standard model (SM) of particle physics is a highly precise and predictive theory,
it does not explain all observed phenomena, such as the nature of dark matter, the matterantimatter asymmetry, and neutrino masses. The SM also suffers from several theoretical shortcomings, e.g., the hierarchy problem, the large number of arbitrary parameters, and why there
are three generations of fermions. In addition, the SM does not include gravity. Thus, beyondthe-SM (BSM) phenomena are expected to exist, although they have eluded detection so far at
the CERN LHC.
Particles with macroscopically long lifetimes are an important possibility in the search for new
phenomena and often appear in BSM theories, notably in models that describe the elementary
particle nature of dark matter. Several physical mechanisms give rise to relatively long particle lifetimes in the SM, including approximate symmetries, small couplings, near-degenerate
states, and heavy mediators [1]; such mechanisms are also present across a broad range of BSM
theories [2, 3]. Long-lived particles (LLPs) are specifically motivated in many of these models [4]. In the last several years, LLPs have become a major focus in the search for new physics
at the LHC.
If LLPs are produced inside the CMS detector at the LHC, they may decay at a measurable
distance from the primary proton-proton (pp) interaction point (IP) or may completely pass
through the detector before decaying, in contrast to promptly decaying particles that result in
products consistent with an origin at the primary pp interaction. A number of signatures and
decay topologies are possible, depending on the characteristics of the LLP. For example, neutral
LLPs could travel a significant distance through the detector before decaying into displaced
leptons, photons, or jets [5–13]. Heavy, slow-moving LLPs could decay into particles with a
measurable delay relative to the timing of the primary pp interaction [14–16]. A charged LLP
could decay within the CMS tracker into a neutral particle and a charged particle whose momentum is too small for its corresponding track to be reconstructed, producing a “disappearing” track [17, 18], or into one detectable and one undetectable particle, producing a kinked
track. Finally, monopoles or heavy stable charged particles could leave highly ionizing tracks
in the detector [19, 20].
Standard algorithms developed to trigger on and reconstruct “physics objects”, such as leptons, photons, and jets, are usually inadequate for LLP searches because they are designed for
promptly decaying particles, thus alternative techniques are often needed. The CMS trigger
system is designed to collect data quickly, and therefore, the trigger algorithms generally assume promptly decaying particles because displaced object reconstruction is often more computationally intensive. For example, algorithms that reconstruct displaced tracks can have long
processing times because of the high combinatorial complexity of finding tracks whose helical
trajectories are not constrained to intersect the beam axis [21].
Many improvements and extensions for triggering on LLPs with the CMS detector were implemented before or during the LHC Run 3, which started in 2022 and is expected to end in
2026. In this paper, we present the CMS Run 3 LLP trigger program and the performance of
these custom triggers, using pp collision data corresponding to integrated luminosities of up
√
to 123 fb−1 , recorded at s = 13.6 TeV and collected during 2022–2024. We focus on new LLP
triggers introduced for Run 3 data taking, but also describe LLP triggers introduced earlier that
have been maintained or improved since.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we introduce the CMS detector, and in Section 3, we briefly review the CMS trigger system in general. Section 4 describes the standard

3
“online” (trigger-level) and “offline” (after the data are recorded) event reconstruction. In Section 5, we detail the data and simulations used. We describe the custom LLP trigger algorithms
in Section 6 and present the efficiency of each trigger in data and simulation. In Section 7, we
compare the performance of the different LLP triggers, showing their complementary acceptance for benchmark LLP signals, in different fiducial regions of the detector. We provide an
outlook of CMS LLP triggers at the future High-Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) in Section 8. The
paper is summarized in Section 9, and a glossary is provided in Appendix A. Tabulated results
are provided in the HEPData record for this paper [22].

2

The CMS detector

The CMS apparatus [23, 24] is a multipurpose, nearly hermetic detector, designed to trigger
on [25–27] and identify electrons, muons, photons, and (charged and neutral) hadrons [21,
28, 29]. Its central feature is a superconducting solenoid of 6 m internal diameter, providing
a magnetic field of 3.8 T. Within the solenoid volume are a silicon pixel and strip tracker, a
lead tungstate crystal electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL), and a brass and scintillator hadron
calorimeter (HCAL), each composed of a barrel and two endcap sections. Forward calorimeters
extend the η coverage provided by the barrel and endcap detectors. Muons are reconstructed
using gas-ionization detectors embedded in the steel flux-return yoke outside the solenoid.
More detailed descriptions of the CMS detector, together with a definition of the coordinate
system used and the relevant kinematic variables, can be found in Refs. [23, 24]. A quadrant of
the CMS detector is shown in Fig. 1.
Between the beginning of the LHC operation in 2009 and the start of Run 3 data taking in 2022,
the CMS experiment underwent several changes and upgrades to enable the experiment to operate in conditions more challenging than assumed in its original design [24]. During this period, the LHC beam conditions evolved to provide increased luminosity, with several impactful
effects. These include an increase in the average “pileup” (PU), the number of simultaneous
pp collisions per bunch crossing, from 10 in 2011, to 27 in 2016, and to 46 in 2022 [30–33], along
with a corresponding increase in accumulated radiation dose.
The silicon tracker measures charged particles with |η | < 3.0. During the LHC running period
when the data used in this paper were recorded, the silicon tracker consisted of 1856 silicon
pixel and 15 148 silicon strip detector modules. The pixel detector was upgraded with the
installation of a new detector in early 2017 [34]. In the new pixel detector, the number of barrel
layers was increased from three to four, and the number of disks in each endcap from two
to three. The innermost barrel layer was completely replaced to ensure optimal performance
until the end of Run 3. At the same time, the detector material budget was reduced, creating
better tracking performance for pixel detector tracks with |η | < 3.0. For nonisolated particles
of 1 < pT < 10 GeV and |η | < 3.0, the track resolutions are typically 1.5% in pT and 20–75 µm
in the transverse impact parameter d0 [35].
The ECAL measures the energy and timing of electrons and photons with |η | < 3.0 [28]. It consists of a cylindrical barrel (|η | < 1.48) and two endcaps. Scintillation light from the crystals is
detected by photodetectors, digitized at 40 MHz by the readout electronics, and recorded as ten
consecutive samples [36]. The signal time is extracted from a fit to this distribution, with synchronization ensuring that particles from the interaction vertex yield a common reference time.
Decays of Z bosons into electron-positron pairs allow the timing resolution to be accurately
measured in data. For energies above 10 GeV, the ECAL barrel achieves a timing resolution
better than 0.2 ns [37].

η

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

θ°

84.3°

78.6°

73.1°

67.7°

62.5°

57.5°

52.8°

48.4°

44.3°

40.4°

36.8°

η

8
MB4

ME1/2

4
Solenoid magnet

ECAL

RE4/3

RE3/3

ME4/2

RE4/2

2.1 14.0°
2.2 12.6°
2.3 11.5°
2.4 10.4°
2.5 9.4°

Steel
1

3.0 5.7°

Silicon
tracker

0

1

1.8 18.8°

2.0 15.4°

ME1/1

GE1/1

HCAL
2

1.7 20.7°

1.9 17.0°

ME2/1

3

RE3/2

RB1

1.5 25.2°
1.6 22.8°

ME4/1

MB1

ME3/2

RB2
RE2/2

5

ME3/1

MB2

1.3 30.5°

1.4 27.7°

ME2/2

RB3

RE1/3

MB3

6

ME1/3

Wheel 2

RE2/3

Wheel 1

Wheel 0

DTs
CSCs
RPCs
GEMs

RB4

7

0

θ°

1.2 33.5°

RE1/2

R (m)

4

4.0 2.1°

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

5.0 0.77°

12 z (m)

Figure 1: Schematic view in the R-z plane of a CMS detector quadrant at the start of Run 3, with
the axis parallel to the beam (z) running horizontally and the radius (R) increasing upward.
The nominal interaction point (IP) is in the lower left corner. The locations of the various muon
detectors and the steel flux-return yoke (dark areas) are shown, along with the silicon tracker,
the electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL), and the hadronic calorimeter (HCAL). The locations
of the various muon detectors are shown in color: drift tubes (DTs) with labels MB, cathode
strip chambers (CSCs) with labels ME, resistive plate chambers (RPCs) with labels RB and RE,
and gas electron multipliers (GEMs) with labels GE. The M denotes muon, B stands for barrel,
and E for endcap. Figure taken from Ref. [24].
In the region |η | < 1.74, the HCAL cells have widths of 0.087 in η and 0.087 in ϕ. In the η-ϕ
plane, and for |η | < 1.48, the HCAL cells each map onto 5×5 arrays of ECAL crystals to form
calorimeter towers projecting radially outwards from close to the nominal IP. For |η | > 1.74,
the coverage of the towers increases progressively to a maximum of 0.174 in ∆η and ∆ϕ. Within
each tower, the energy deposits in ECAL and HCAL cells are summed to define the calorimeter
tower energies, which are subsequently used to provide the energies and directions of hadronic
jets.
An upgrade of the HCAL was performed in stages that were installed between 2016 and
2019 [38]. In the HCAL barrel and endcaps, the readout electronics were improved, providing a finer granularity readout. In addition, the segmentation was increased to allow for both
layer-dependent corrections for the observed radiation damage to the scintillating tiles [39] and
better rejection of energy deposits from PU interactions. The previous generation of photosensors was replaced by silicon photomultipliers, which measure the scintillator light output with
a better signal-to-noise ratio. The readout electronics were upgraded to support the increased
channel count, improve the precision, and add signal timing information. When combining
information from the entire detector, the jet energy resolution amounts typically to 15–20% at
30 GeV, 10% at 100 GeV, and 5% at 1 TeV [40].
The CMS muon system consists of four types of gas-ionization detectors: drift tube chambers
(DTs), cathode strip chambers (CSCs), resistive-plate chambers (RPCs), and triple gas electron
multiplier chambers (GEMs). The DT and CSC detectors are located in the regions |η | < 1.2
and 0.9 < |η | < 2.4, respectively, and are complemented by the RPCs in the range |η | <

5
1.9. The GEMs are located in the region 1.55 < |η | < 2.18. The chambers are arranged to
maximize the coverage and to provide some overlap wherever possible. In both the barrel and
endcap regions, the chambers are grouped into four “muon stations”, where each station is
progressively further from the center of CMS and separated by layers of the steel absorber of
the flux-return yoke. A detailed description of these detectors, including the gas composition
and operating voltage, is reported in Ref. [29].
The GEM detector, consisting of four gas gaps separated by three GEM foils, was added in the
endcaps before the start of Run 3 [24, 41]. The other subsystems, namely the DTs, CSCs, and
RPCs, underwent several upgrades. The upper part of the CMS detector was covered with a
neutron shield to reduce the background in the upper external DT chambers. An outer ring
of CSCs (ME4/2) was added after data taking ended in 2012 (at the end of Run 1), and in
preparation for the HL-LHC, the bulk of the CSC electronics upgrades that required chamber
access were already performed during the long shutdown before Run 3 data taking. Outer
rings of the RPC chambers in station four (RE4/2 and RE4/3) were also added.
To cope with increasing instantaneous luminosities, the CMS data acquisition system underwent multiple upgrades [24]. A new optical readout link with a higher bandwidth of 10 Gb/s
was developed. The bulk of the data acquisition system downstream from the detector-specific
readout benefited from advances in technology to achieve a much more compact design, while
doubling the event building bandwidth.

3

The CMS trigger system

The CMS detector selects events of interest using a two-tiered trigger system that reduces the
input event rate of 40 MHz to several kHz. The first level (L1), composed of custom hardware
processors, uses information from the calorimeters and muon detectors to select events at a
rate of around 100 kHz within a fixed latency of approximately 4 µs [25]. The second level,
known as the high-level trigger (HLT), consists of a farm of processors running a version of the
full event reconstruction software optimized for fast processing and reduces the event rate to
2–20 kHz, depending on the output data format, before data storage [26].
After Run 1, the L1 trigger (L1T) hardware was entirely upgraded and has operated successfully since 2016 [42]. For Run 3, although no major hardware changes have been made, the L1T
performance has been improved using new algorithms. Thanks to the modular architecture
of the L1T system and the flexibility of its design, new features are straightforward to deploy
online. Some of the new algorithms in Run 3 are based on machine-learning techniques, and
software, such as HLS 4 ML [43], facilitates the use of these machine-learning techniques in fieldprogrammable gate arrays (FPGAs). Developments for Run 3 within the L1T primarily focus
on expanding the physics reach of CMS through improved object measurement and calibration, as well as the introduction of dedicated triggers for LLPs and other exotic signatures.
Some of these new triggers only became possible because of the enhanced capabilities of the
global trigger logic and the increased trigger information provided by the calorimeters and
muon systems. Furthermore, in recent years, the output rate of the L1T has been increased to
accommodate more triggers tailored to BSM searches and B physics.
The data processing of the HLT is structured around the concept of an HLT “path”, which is a
set of algorithmic processing steps run in a predefined order to both reconstruct physics objects
and apply selection criteria to these objects based on the physics requirements. At the start of
the execution of an HLT path, each path requires events to pass specific L1Ts. These L1Ts are
said to “seed” the rest of the HLT algorithm. The trigger objects generally used in the L1T are

6
muons, e/γ objects (so-called since electrons and photons are indistinguishable at the L1T, as
currently no tracking information is available there), jets, hadronically decaying tau leptons,
and event-level information, such as HT and pmiss
T , explained in Section 4. Then, each HLT
path is implemented as a sequence of reconstruction and filtering steps, generally of increasing
complexity, reconstruction refinement, and physics sophistication. For example, the full track
reconstruction is usually performed only after some initial reconstruction and selection using
data from the calorimeters and muon detectors. In case a path has requirements on two or more
different kinds of physics objects, these different parts of the path are referred to as “legs” of
the trigger. The reconstruction modules and selection filters of the HLT use the same software
framework, called CMSSW [44], used for offline reconstruction and analyses.
The L1T and HLT include primary triggers for analyses, as well as triggers for calibration,
efficiency measurements, control region measurements, etc. that typically have looser requirements than the primary triggers. These latter triggers are often “prescaled”, meaning that they
select only a fraction of the events that satisfy their conditions, to limit the storage rate. In
contrast, an “unprescaled” trigger selects all events that satisfy the conditions of the trigger
algorithm.
The HLT refines the purity and further reduces the rate of events previously selected by the
L1T to an average rate of several kHz for offline storage and prompt reconstruction of standard pp collision events. Additional rate beyond the nominal few kHz is allocated to triggers
that collect “parked” data. The offline reconstruction of these parked data is postponed until
computing resources are available to process the data. In addition, a higher rate of reducedsize events can be acquired using a technique known as “data scouting”, where only high-level
physics objects, such as jets or leptons, reconstructed at the HLT, are stored on disk. In data
scouting, no raw data from the detector are stored for later offline analysis. In total, CMS employs three main approaches to data collection: the standard data stream, which uses the full
event reconstruction performed offline immediately after data taking; the parked data stream,
where events are saved for delayed offline reconstruction when computing resources permit;
and the scouting data stream, in which no offline reconstruction is performed, and only the
output of the HLT-level reconstruction is stored and used for analysis. The performance of
parking and scouting is described further in Ref. [45].
Since 2016, the HLT has been operated using multithreaded event processing software, which
minimizes memory requirements by increasing the number of processes running in parallel [24]. Also, since the start of Run 3, the HLT has made use of graphical processing units
(GPUs) in the trigger farm. Substantial improvements were achieved in the physics performance and speed of the software, as well as in the computing infrastructure, including direct
remote data access. Algorithms implemented to run on both central processing units (CPUs)
and GPUs are automatically directed to run on a GPU if one is available; otherwise, the CPUbased version of the algorithm is executed. The HLT can offload the pixel detector track reconstruction and parts of the calorimeter reconstruction to GPUs. For example, the PATAT RACK
project [46] developed parallelized versions of pixel detector track and vertex reconstruction
algorithms that can run on NVIDIA GPUs, while a collaboration between CMS and OpenLab ported the electromagnetic and hadronic calorimeter local reconstruction algorithms to
GPUs [47, 48]. These efforts have reduced the overall event processing time by about 40% [49].
In preparation for Run 3, the ECAL trigger-primitive formation and calibration algorithms
were optimized to cope with higher instantaneous luminosity and PU [24]. The triggerprimitive thresholds were reoptimized to suppress spurious signals arising from direct energy
deposits in the photodetectors, which have become relatively more frequent since the start of

7
Run 2. Additionally, the calibration update frequency at the L1T and HLT was increased from
twice per week to once per LHC fill to correct for dynamic variations in crystal and photodetector responses during collisions.
Several changes were implemented for the Run 3 data-taking period to improve the reconstruction of physics objects at the HLT. For example, the tracking in the pixel and strip trackers,
which is generally discussed in Section 4.2, was significantly revised. The pixel detector tracks
are now reconstructed by the PATAT RACK algorithm mentioned earlier, which offers improved
performance over the HLT pixel detector tracking used in 2018 [46]. This improvement allowed
the HLT tracking to be typically performed using a single global iteration [50], as opposed to
the three iterations that were used in Run 2 (2015–2018). Since 2025, a parallel and vectorized
Kalman filter-based algorithm called “mkFit” [51] has been employed for track pattern recognition at the HLT, similar to the procedure used in the offline reconstruction since the start of
Run 3 [52]. The PATAT RACK and mkFit algorithms are further described in Section 4.2. Furthermore, the identification of b jets at the HLT is essential to collect events containing such jets that
would otherwise not pass the standard lepton, jet, or pmiss
triggers at their nominal thresholds.
T
Two new neural network taggers, D EEP J ET [53] and PARTICLE N ET [54], were deployed in 2022,
with improved performance over Run 2. In addition to tracks, the D EEP J ET algorithm also uses
information from neutral and charged particle-flow (PF) [55] jet constituents, while the graph
neural network-based PARTICLE N ET algorithm provides concurrent jet-flavor classification for
categories of b, c, and light quarks, gluons, and hadronically decaying tau leptons. The global
PF algorithm [55], which aims to reconstruct all individual particles in an event by combining
information provided by each CMS subdetector, is explained in Section 4.1.
In Run 3, data parking still targets B physics, as in Runs 1 and 2, but it also allows a wide range
of other physics topics to be investigated [45]. At the end of 2022, the parked data recorded
events with a single displaced muon, events with two low-pT muons, and events with two
low-pT , central electrons. In 2023, the parking strategy was extended by improving the purity
of the dielectron triggers and adding parked data triggers for events with two b-tagged jets,
Higgs boson events produced via vector boson fusion and selected with forward jet triggers,
and many LLP signatures.
In Run 3, the HLT scouting data were recorded at a rate as high as 30 (22) kHz in 2022 (2023),
greatly increased compared to Run 2, with an event size of about 7 kB, compared to the raw
event size of about 1 MB for fully reconstructed events. In 2022–2023, a special version of the PF
reconstruction algorithm was used for HLT scouting, using pixel detector tracks reconstructed
with PATAT RACK [45]. In 2024, the algorithm was updated to use entire tracks, as is done for
fully-reconstructed events at the HLT, to improve the momentum and spatial resolution. In
addition to the PF objects that were already stored during Run 2, HLT scouting in Run 3 was
expanded to include electrons and photons for the first time, as well as enhanced muon and
track information with respect to Run 2.
In addition, a scouting system is being prepared for the L1T [56, 57]. This system collects and
stores the reconstructed particle primitives and intermediate information of the L1T processing
chain at the full 40 MHz bunch crossing rate. The L1 scouting will provide vast amounts of data
for detector diagnostics, luminosity measurements, and the study of otherwise inaccessible
signatures, such as LLPs. A demonstrator L1 scouting system first took data in 2018 and has
since been expanded with new FPGAs and inputs.

8

4

Offline and online event reconstruction

In this section, we describe the standard event and object reconstruction algorithms, both for
the offline reconstruction and the online reconstruction at the L1T and HLT. The details of the
online reconstruction algorithms and their performance during Run 2 can be found in Refs. [25]
and [27] for the L1T and the HLT, respectively. We explain here how the offline reconstruction
algorithms are simplified and sped up for online use; in particular, online reconstruction algorithms usually assume that particles are promptly produced, allowing online objects to be
reconstructed within the available CPU budget. We point out where the standard online reconstruction algorithms are inefficient for displaced objects, motivating the dedicated triggers
described in Section 6.

4.1

The particle-flow algorithm

A PF algorithm [55] aims to reconstruct and identify each individual particle in an event, with
an optimized combination of information from the various elements of the CMS detector. The
energy of photons is obtained from the ECAL measurement. The energy of an electron is determined from a combination of the electron momentum at the primary interaction vertex, as
determined by the tracker, the energy of the corresponding ECAL cluster, and the energy sum
of all bremsstrahlung photons spatially compatible with originating from the electron track.
The energy of a muon is obtained from the curvature of the corresponding track. The energy of
a charged hadron is determined from a combination of the momentum measured in the tracker
and the matching ECAL and HCAL energy deposits, corrected for the response function of
the calorimeters to hadronic showers. Finally, the energy of neutral hadrons is obtained from
the corresponding corrected ECAL and HCAL energies. The primary vertex (PV) is taken to
be the vertex corresponding to the hardest scattering in the event, evaluated using tracking
information alone, as described in Section 9.4.1 of Ref. [58]. The online PF reconstruction features a simplified version of the offline PF algorithm, particularly for the electron and photon
reconstruction, to meet the timing constraints for online reconstruction.

4.2

Tracking and vertexing

Charged particle tracks in the tracker are reconstructed from hits in the pixel and strip tracker
using a Kalman filtering technique [59]. The collection of reconstructed tracks is produced
by multiple passes (iterations) of the track reconstruction sequence in a process called “iterative tracking” [21]. The basic idea of iterative tracking is that the initial iterations search for
tracks that are easiest to find (e.g., of relatively large pT , and produced near the interaction
region). After each iteration, the hits associated with the tracks are removed, thereby reducing the combinatorial complexity and simplifying subsequent iterations that search for more
difficult classes of tracks (e.g., low-pT or significantly displaced tracks).
The offline tracking consists of multiple iterations. The first iteration (the “initial step”), which
is the source of most reconstructed tracks, is designed to reconstruct prompt tracks originating
near the pp IP that have at least four pixel detector hits. The following iterations are used
to recover tracks with fewer hits in the pixel tracker, lower pT , and/or larger displacements.
Figure 2 (left) shows the tracking efficiency for different iterations as a function of the radial
position of the track production vertex, for the standard offline Run 3 tracking based on a
simulation of top quark-antiquark pair production (tt). The offline tracking misidentification
rate, defined as the ratio between the number of reconstructed tracks not matched to simulation
to the total number of reconstructed tracks, grows from 0.02 to 0.30 as the distance of closest
approach of the track to the beam axis increases from 0 to 10 cm.

Tracking and vertexing

Offline tracking efficiency

1.4

9

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

Initial
+HighPtTriplet
+LowPtQuad
+LowPtTriplet
+DetachedQuad
+DetachedTriplet
+MixedTriplet
+PixelPair
+Without pixel
+TobTec
+JetCore
+Muon inside-out
+Muon outside-in

1.2 tt events (〈PU〉=62)
Track p > 0.9 GeV,

1 |η| < 2.5T
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
10−2

HLT tracking efficiency

4.2

(13.6 TeV)

1.4

CMS Simulation
1.2 tt events (〈PU〉=62)
1

Track p > 0.9 GeV, |η| < 2.5
T

Patatrack+Mitigation

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

10−1

1

10

102

103

Radial vertex position [cm]

0
10−2

10−1

1

10

102

103

Radial vertex position [cm]

Figure 2: The offline standard tracking efficiency during Run 3 (left) for different tracking iterations, as a function of simulated radial position of the track production vertex. The overall
standard tracking efficiency at the HLT during Run 3 (right), as a function of the simulated
radial position of the track production vertex. The standard tracking at the HLT includes the
nominal PATAT RACK global iteration plus the additional iteration that mitigates the pixel detector issues. For both plots, a tt simulation under 2025 conditions with an average PU of 62 is
used, and the tracks are required to have pT > 0.9 GeV and |η | < 2.5. The tracking efficiency
is defined as the number of simulated tracks (with the aforementioned selection requirements)
geometrically matched to a reconstructed track, divided by the total simulated tracks passing
the selections.
Each iteration starts with a “seed” that defines the initial estimate of the trajectory parameters
and their uncertainties, using only a few hits. Then, the Kalman filter extrapolates the seed
trajectory along the expected path of the charged particle, searching for additional hits that can
be assigned to the track candidate. The next step in each iteration is performed by the trackfitting module, which provides the best possible estimate of the parameters of each trajectory
using a Kalman filter and smoother. Finally, the track selection sets quality flags and discards
tracks that fail criteria specific to each iteration. The main differences among the iterations are
in the configuration of the seed generation and the final track selection. Furthermore, in Run 3,
the highly parallel and vectorized mkFit algorithm [51, 52] was introduced, enabling the time
for the overall track reconstruction to be reduced by about 25% with respect to the previous
algorithm, while retaining strong physics performance.
The standard HLT tracking [50, 60] is similar to that used in the offline reconstruction, except
that in Run 3, HLT tracking is typically performed using a single global iteration targeting
prompt tracks, as discussed in Section 3. An additional tracking iteration, seeded by pixel
detector hit pairs, has been used since 2024 to mitigate issues in specific regions of the pixel
detector that had significantly reduced the efficiency of the standard iteration [61]. Figure 2
(right) shows the HLT tracking efficiency as a function of the radial position of the track production vertex. Starting in 2025, the mkFit algorithm has also been employed at the HLT. The
offline iterations that target displaced tracks are not used in HLT tracking except in dedicated
triggers such as the displaced-tau paths discussed in Section 6.2.2 and the displaced-jets paths
discussed in Section 6.2.3. As a result, the HLT tracking efficiency drops quickly for vertex positions greater than approximately 1 cm from the beam axis. The HLT tracking misidentification

10
rate grows from 0.08 to 0.35 as the distance of closest approach of the track to the beam axis
increases from 0 to 10 cm.
Vertices are produced from clusters of tracks, and the same deterministic annealing algorithm [62] is used in the offline and HLT reconstruction [21]. The vertex position is fitted using
an adaptive vertex fitter [63]. While the offline reconstruction uses standard tracks for vertexing, the HLT vertices, called “pixel vertices”, are produced from a subset of the pixel detector
tracks described in Section 3. The HLT pixel vertices algorithm has been modified in Run 3 to
run on GPUs, where available.

4.3

Muons

Muon tracks in the offline analysis are first reconstructed independently in the tracker and in
the muon system using Kalman filtering techniques [59]. In the muon system, “standalone
muons” are reconstructed by combining the information from the DT, CSC, RPC, and GEM
detectors. The signals from these four types of muon detectors are first combined into track
segments, which are thereafter used as the input to a Kalman filtering algorithm. As described
in Section 4.2, in the tracker, tracks are reconstructed iteratively, with each iteration seeded by
a different combination of pixel or strip detector hits, to ensure all relevant track topologies are
reconstructed [21]. In the same way, dedicated iterations seeded by standalone muons maximize the efficiency of muon track reconstruction. Tracker tracks and standalone muon tracks
with compatible momentum, direction, and position in the transverse plane are combined into
“global muons”, and a combined fit to all associated tracker and muon system signals is performed to determine the parameters of the global track. Within the tracker, the global muon
trajectory is built “outside-in”, in that it starts with the outer tracker layers and propagates inwards towards the IP. The pT resolution of global muons is 1–3%, while for standalone muons,
it is about an order of magnitude worse [29, 64]. However, standalone muons, particularly
those reconstructed without constraining the track to the PV (“displaced standalone muons”),
are often used in offline analyses to allow the efficient reconstruction of muons with displacements up to a few meters. The trajectories of muons with very low pT are deflected in the
magnetic field to such a degree that they do not reach all stations of the muon system. To recover such muons, for which a standalone muon might not be reconstructed, tracker tracks are
extrapolated to the muon segments, and a loose geometrical matching to DT and CSC segments
is performed. If at least one compatible segment is found, the track is classified as a “tracker
muon”. The tracker muon trajectory is reconstructed “inside out” from the center of the detector towards the muon system. The offline muon reconstruction and performance are described
in more detail in Refs. [29, 65].
In the trigger system, three types of muons are defined, referred to as L1, L2, and L3 muons [66].
An L1 muon is identified by the L1T system using only information from the muon detectors.
The L1T uses three regional track finders to reconstruct muons: the barrel muon track finder
(BMTF) covering 0 < |η | < 0.83, the overlap muon track finder (OMTF) covering 0.83 < |η | <
1.24, and the endcap muon track finder (EMTF) covering 1.24 < |η | < 2.40. The global muon
trigger collects reconstructed muons from the three track finders and removes geometrically
overlapping tracks using information based on pT and quality, sending the remainder to the
L1 Global Trigger, which decides whether to keep the event for processing by the HLT. The L1
muon reconstruction is described in greater detail in Refs. [25, 26, 66].
In Run 3, there are beam axis-constrained and beam axis-unconstrained versions of each of
these three L1 muon track finder algorithms [24]. The beam axis-unconstrained track finder
algorithms are designed to measure displaced muons, while the beam axis-constrained algo-

4.4

Electrons and photons

11

rithms are inefficient for displaced muons. The beam-axis-constrained BMTF uses a Kalman
filter algorithm that is constrained to the beam-axis, while the beam-axis-constrained OMTF
and EMTF algorithms include implicit beam-axis constraints because they are optimized for
prompt muons with machine-learning algorithms trained on prompt samples. As a result of
using the beam axis-unconstrained track finder algorithms, the trigger efficiency is increased
significantly for muons with pT > 10 GeV when the transverse displacements are larger than
20 cm, while in the case of lower-pT muons, the displaced-muon algorithms perform similarly
to the prompt algorithms. The developments for displaced L1 muons and their performance
are further explored in Section 6.4.1.
The L2 and L3 muons are defined within the HLT: an L2 muon is identified using information
from the muon detectors alone, analogous to the offline standalone muon reconstruction algorithm, while an L3 muon additionally matches the muon detector track to a track from the
tracker, analogous to the offline tracker and global muons, with both inside-out and outside-in
trajectories. Displaced muons are found with both the inside-out and outside-in L3 muons. As
is the case with their offline counterpart reconstruction algorithms, L3 muons have better pT
resolution than L2 muons. Standard muon HLT paths usually use the full L3 muon reconstruction, while muon HLT paths targeting displaced signatures, including some paths described in
Sections 6.4.1–6.4.4 and 6.5.2, often stop after the L2 muon reconstruction algorithm. The L3
muons can still have sensitivity to displaced muons, especially with the L3 muon reconstruction algorithms for displaced muons that are described in Sections 6.4.1–6.4.3.

4.4

Electrons and photons

Electron and photon reconstruction is based on clusters of ECAL energy deposits [28]. In the
offline reconstruction, these clusters are formed by grouping nearby energy deposits typically
exceeding 80 MeV in the ECAL barrel and 300 MeV in the ECAL endcaps. The times associated
with the energy deposits must be within 5 ns of the collision, corrected for the time of flight of
a particle. A useful concept in the reconstruction of calorimeter objects is the transverse energy
ET , which is the energy of the object in question multiplied by sin θ, where θ is the polar angle with respect to the center of the CMS detector. Placing requirements on this quantity is an
efficient way to reduce the number of objects reconstructed to a manageable level, and this approach is used when only calorimeter energy is available for a reconstructed element, without
any associated primary vertex. A seed cluster is then defined as the one containing most of the
energy deposited in any specific region with ET > 1 GeV. Clusters of ECAL deposits within
a certain geometric area around the seed cluster are combined into “superclusters” to include
photon conversions and bremsstrahlung losses. A dedicated tracking algorithm, based on the
Gaussian sum filter (GSF) [67], is used for electrons to estimate the track parameters. This
GSF tracking step is seeded by both pixel detector seeds that are compatible with the supercluster position and the trajectory of an electron, as well as all tracker tracks with pT > 2 GeV
that are compatible with an electron trajectory. A dedicated algorithm [68] is used to find the
tracker tracks that are likely to originate from photons converting into electron-positron pairs.
Then, ECAL clusters, superclusters, GSF tracks, as well as conversion tracks and associated
clusters, are all used in the PF algorithm, which resolves the inputs into electron and photon
objects. There is no dedicated offline reconstruction algorithm for displaced electrons, but GSF
electrons benefit from the displaced tracking iterations performed in the iterative tracking (Section 4.2).
In the online reconstruction, the electron and photon candidates at the L1T are based on “trigger towers”. As mentioned in Section 2, in the barrel, these trigger towers are defined by
5×5 ECAL crystals that are grouped with the HCAL tower directly behind them, while in the

12
endcaps, the trigger towers are formed from groups of 5–25 crystals depending on their η-ϕ
position [25]. The trigger tower with the largest ET is clustered together with adjacent towers,
using a procedure that trims the energy deposits to include only contiguous towers, to match
the electron or photon signature in the calorimeter. To form an L1 candidate, energy clusters
must satisfy additional identification criteria and, optionally, isolation requirements. This L1T
reconstruction of the electron and photon candidates is called “e/γ dynamic clustering”.
The HLT electron and photon identification begins with a regional reconstruction of the energy
deposited in the ECAL crystals around the L1 candidates [27]. Since Run 2, the signals in the
ECAL crystals have been reconstructed by fitting the signal pulse with multiple template functions to mitigate the effect of out-of-time PU, arising from additional pp interactions within
previous or subsequent bunch crossings. Superclusters are then built using the same reconstruction algorithm as used offline [69]. Not all the energy of the incident particle is captured
by the superclustering algorithm because of energy threshold requirements on individual crystals or because the energy is deposited in an uninstrumented area of the detector. Therefore, in
both the online and offline reconstruction, the supercluster energy is corrected for such effects.
At the HLT, this correction is designed to be more tolerant of changing detector conditions and
the presence of background, rather than aiming for the ultimate achievable precision.
The resulting superclusters may then undergo additional selections, such as those based on
kinematic variables, the shower shape, or isolation, depending on the HLT path. Electron identification can be enhanced by looking for pixel detector hits that match the trajectory the electron took through the detector based on its supercluster position, in a process known as pixel
matching. If further background rejection is required, a GSF track can be reconstructed using
the trajectory of any matched pixel detector hits as a seed. In contrast to the offline reconstruction, GSF tracks are not seeded by generic tracker tracks at the HLT. Thus, any electron tracks
at the HLT must have hits in the pixel detector and therefore can not be significantly displaced.
As a result, analyses that target displaced electron signatures often do not require a matched
electron track at the HLT (Sections 6.3.3, 6.3.4, and 6.4.3). Since 2017, the pixel matching algorithm has required three pixel detector hits rather than two to maximize early background
rejection, while a configuration with two pixel detector hits in a row is accepted only if the
trajectory passes through a maximum of three active modules.
The electron momentum is estimated by combining the energy measurement in the ECAL with
the momentum measurement in the tracker. The momentum resolution for electrons with pT ≈
45 GeV from Z → ee decays ranges from 1.6 to 5%. It is generally better in the barrel region
than in the endcaps, and also depends on the bremsstrahlung energy emitted by the electron
as it traverses the material in front of the ECAL [28, 70].
In the barrel section of the ECAL, an energy resolution of about 1% is achieved for unconverted
or late-converting photons in the tens of GeV energy range. The energy resolution of the remaining barrel photons is about 1.3% up to |η | = 1, changing to about 2.5% at |η | = 1.4. In the
endcaps, the energy resolution is about 2.5% for unconverted or late-converting photons, and
between 3 and 4% for the other ones [68].

4.5

Jets

Offline, hadronic jets are clustered from the energy deposits in the calorimeter towers using
the infrared- and collinear-safe anti-kT algorithm [71, 72] with a nominal distance parameter
of 0.4. Jet momentum is determined as the vectorial sum of all particle momenta in the jet,
and is found from simulation to be, on average, within 5 to 10% of the true momentum over
the whole pT spectrum and detector acceptance. When combining information from the entire

4.6

Tau leptons

13

detector, the jet energy resolution amounts typically to 15–20% at 30 GeV, 10% at 100 GeV, and
5% at 1 TeV [40]. The PU interactions can contribute additional tracks and calorimetric energy
deposits to the jet momentum. The PU per particle identification algorithm (PUPPI) [73, 74]
is used to mitigate the effect of pileup at the reconstructed particle level, making use of local
shape information, event pileup properties, and tracking information. A local shape variable
is defined, which distinguishes between collinear and low-pT diffuse distributions of other
particles surrounding the particle under consideration. The former is attributed to particles
originating from the hard scatter, and the latter to particles originating from pileup interactions.
Charged particles identified to be originating from pileup vertices are discarded. For each
neutral particle, a local shape variable is computed using the surrounding charged particles
compatible with the primary vertex within the tracker acceptance (|η | < 2.5), and using both
charged and neutral particles in the region outside of the tracker coverage. The momenta of the
neutral particles are then rescaled according to their probability to originate from the primary
interaction vertex deduced from the local shape variable, superseding the need for jet-based
pileup corrections [73].
Jets are reconstructed at the L1T by summing the energies of a 9×9 window of trigger towers
centered on a jet seed that must have an energy greater than 4 GeV, which corresponds to
approximately the same jet size as for jets reconstructed offline with ∆R = 0.4 within the barrel
calorimeter. The energy contribution from pileup is corrected by considering the four 3×9
regions on the boundaries of the jet and subtracting the sum of the three lowest energies in
these regions. The resulting jet energy is then calibrated. For Run 3, an LLP jet identification
algorithm is implemented that uses the HCAL timing and depth information (Section 6.3.1).
Jets are reconstructed at the HLT [27] using the anti-kT clustering algorithm. The inputs for
the HLT jet algorithm can be either calorimeter towers or reconstructed objects from the PF
algorithm. Most HLT jet paths use the PF inputs (“PF jets”), whereas calorimeter jets (“calo
jets”) are used as a first step to identify jet signatures and initiate the PF reconstruction. To
account for detector effects and collision conditions, corrections are applied to the estimated
PF hadron energies, average PU energy, and jet energy scale.
Several HLT b-tagging algorithms designed for promptly produced b jets, such as the D EEP J ET and PARTICLE N ET neural networks discussed in Section 3, can provide complementary
contributions for displaced-jet signatures with proper decay lengths cτ ≲ 1 mm, where τ is
the proper lifetime and c is the speed of light. However, the HLT b-tagging algorithms take
standard HLT tracks and secondary vertices as inputs, which are tuned for b tagging and not
efficient for LLPs with significant displacements or large masses. Furthermore, the D EEP J ET
and PARTICLE N ET neural networks are trained to identify the prompt b jets produced in SM
processes. Therefore, their efficiency decreases rapidly for cτ ≳ 1 mm, necessitating the development of dedicated triggers targeting displaced and delayed jets. Sections 6.2.3, 6.3.1, 6.3.2,
and 6.5.1 describe triggers that target displaced- and delayed-jet signatures.

4.6

Tau leptons

Tau leptons decay predominantly to one or three charged hadrons, together with zero, one, or
two neutral pions (τ h ) [1]. The final-state particles may produce clusters in the calorimeters
that are separated in ϕ because of the magnetic field. At the L1T, the τ h reconstruction is based
on an adaptation of the e/γ dynamic clustering (Section 4.4), which is used to reconstruct
single clusters around local maxima or seeds that can subsequently be merged into a single τ h
candidate. Both offline and at the HLT, hadronic τ lepton decays are reconstructed from jets using the hadrons-plus-strips (HPS) algorithm [75], which combines one or three tracks from the

14
strip tracker with energy deposits in the calorimeters to identify the tau lepton decay modes.
Neutral pions are reconstructed from reconstructed electrons and photon candidates as strips
with dynamic size in η-ϕ, where the strip size varies as a function of the pT of the electron or
photon candidate. The HLT τ h algorithm is composed of three steps. The first two steps, called
L2 and L2.5, are the same as those used in the online τ h reconstruction in Run 2, and they are
described in detail in Ref. [75]. The L2 step uses the energy deposits in the calorimeter towers,
while the L2.5 step complements these energy deposits with the information from the pixel
detector. The third step, L3, applies the HPS algorithm, which receives the necessary inputs
from the PF event reconstruction. The tracking reconstruction step within the PF algorithm is
inefficient for displaced tau leptons because it assumes prompt tracks, and it has been modified
in Run 3 for the displaced τ h use case, as discussed in Section 6.2.2. In addition, the standard
HPS algorithm requires that the τ h constituents originate from the IP, making it inefficient for
displaced τ h objects. Overcoming this challenge at the HLT is also discussed in Section 6.2.2.
It is possible for light leptons and jets originating from the hadronization of quarks or gluons
to be erroneously reconstructed as τ h candidates. The deep neural network D EEP TAU [76] was
developed to distinguish genuine τ h from misidentified τ h candidates in the offline reconstruction. Information from all individual reconstructed particles near the τ h axis is combined with
properties of the τ h candidate and the event. The rate for a jet to be misidentified as τ h by
D EEP TAU depends on the pT and quark flavor of the jet. In simulated events from W boson
production in association with jets, it has been estimated to be around 3% for a genuine τ h
identification efficiency of 60%, for jets with 20 < pT < 100 GeV. The misidentification rate
for electrons (muons) is 2.60 (0.03)% for a genuine τ h identification efficiency of 80 (>99)%.
Section 6.2.2 describes triggers that target displaced τ h signatures, and Section 6.3.2 describes
triggers that make explicit use of L1 tau seeds.

4.7

Hadrons, energy sums, and missing transverse momentum

Charged hadrons are identified as energy clusters associated with charged particle tracks that
are neither identified as electrons nor as muons. Neutral hadrons are identified as HCAL energy clusters not linked to any charged-hadron trajectory, or as a combined ECAL and HCAL
energy excess with respect to the expected charged-hadron energy deposit.
The total hadronic transverse momentum HT is defined as the scalar pT sum of all jets that meet
certain selection criteria. While the details of the selection may vary among different offline
analyses and different HLT paths, a common definition includes all jets with pT > 30 GeV and
|η | < 3.0.

The missing transverse momentum vector ⃗pTmiss is computed as the negative vector sum of
the transverse momenta of all the PF candidates in an event, and its magnitude is denoted as
pmiss
[77]. The ⃗pTmiss is modified to account for corrections to the energy scale of the reconT
structed jets in the event. The PUPPI algorithm is applied to reduce the PU dependence of the
⃗pTmiss observable. The ⃗pTmiss is computed from the PF candidates weighted by their probability
to originate from the PV [77].
At the L1T, pmiss
is calculated as the negative vector sum of the trigger tower energies across
T
the full calorimeter. In contrast, the HLT calculates pmiss
while accounting for the instrumenT
tal effects of detector noise, beam-induced backgrounds, and anomalous forward calorimeter
signals to keep the rates of the pmiss
triggers within operational limits. Thus, additional filterT
ing algorithms are applied during the HLT pmiss
reconstruction to achieve lower rates for pmiss
T
T
triggers [27]. Calorimeter deposits consistent with a noise signature or beam halo interaction
are removed from the energy sum computation at the HLT. Online jet energy corrections can

15
also be propagated to the calculation of the HLT pmiss
T , in a similar way to the offline procedure.
miss
An alternative pT trigger is based on a calculation that uses all the reconstructed PF objects
miss, µ
/
” HLT paths. In this approach, events with high-pT
except for muons, leading to the “pT
muons are also assigned large online pmiss
T , whereas for events with no reconstructed muons,
the two calculations coincide. This path is mainly used for searches for new physics in final
states with only jets and pmiss
T . A dedicated trigger to select disappearing tracks (Section 6.2.1)
miss, µ
/
, thereby allowing a lower minimum threshold
requires an isolated track in addition to pT
miss, µ
/
on pT
.

5

Data and simulation

The trigger performance studies use data collected with the CMS detector during 2022–2024.
In addition, simulations of both SM background and LLP BSM signal processes are used. The
simulation of collision events is implemented in two steps. In the first, a fixed-order perturbative quantum chromodynamics (QCD) calculation of up to four noncollinear high-pT partons
is performed. This is followed by a simulation of the underlying event, parton showering, and
hadronization. The first step is usually performed by a matrix element calculator and event
generator, and the M AD G RAPH5 aMC @ NLO (v2.73 and v2.9.13, depending on the sample) [78]
package is used for almost all the studies presented in this paper; the latter step is usually
implemented by the PYTHIA 8.306 [79] generator. Combining the two steps is a delicate procedure; a matching procedure must be implemented to avoid double-counting of processes in
the combination, with the exact recipe depending on the order of the perturbative calculation.
The MLM merging [80] is used for leading-order (LO) calculations, while the FxFx [81] method
is used for next-to-LO (NLO). Parton distribution functions (PDFs) must be used to map the
simulated colliding protons to the initial-state partons that are present in the matrix element
calculations. The PYTHIA parameters must be adjusted to a set of values, called a tune, that
best describe the observed dynamics of the pp collisions. The samples used here employ the
NNPDF3.1 next-to-NLO PDFs [82] and the CP5 tune [83]. The detector response to simulated
particles is modeled using the G EANT 4 software [84]. Simulated minimum bias interactions
are superimposed on each hard scattering to simulate the effect of additional PU interactions
within the same or neighboring bunch crossings.
To demonstrate the performance of the triggers, a set of LLP signal processes described below
is used. A wide variety of models with different mass and lifetime hypotheses are employed,
as the regions of phase space targeted by the triggers and the corresponding searches vary
significantly.
Supersymmetry (SUSY) is a class of models that extend the SM with a new symmetry that
introduces a fermionic (bosonic) superparner, called a “sparticle”, for each boson (fermion)
in the SM. In SUSY, the superpartners of the leptons are called “sleptons”, and the superpartners of the gauge and Higgs bosons (called “winos”, “binos”, and “higgsinos”) mix to
form “charginos” and “neutralinos”. Figure 3 shows diagrams for an anomaly-mediated SUSY
breaking (AMSB) model [85, 86] in which a chargino χe1± is nearly mass-degenerate with a neutralino χe01 , and the decay of the chargino is of the form χe1± → χe01 + X, where X is an SM particle
that can be a charged pion π ± , an electron, or a muon, depending on the superpartner composition of the lightest neutralino state. The χe1± is generated for masses between 100 and 1200 GeV
and cτ between 0.1 and 10 m.
Figure 4 shows the diagram for the H → XX or H → SS process. This scenario is a simplified
model motivated by the twin Higgs scenario [87–89]. Generically, we define H to be an SM-like

16

π±

π±
p

χ
e±
1

p

χ
e02

χ
e01

Z

χ
e01

p

χ
e±
1

p

χ
e∓
1

χ
e01
χ
e01
π∓

π±
p

χ
e±
1

χ
e01

χ
e01

p

Figure 3: Diagrams for the AMSB χe1± → χe01 + X process. The X particle is shown here as a
charged pion π ± , but X can also be an electron or a muon, depending on the type of neutralino
χe01 .

Higgs boson with a mass of 125 GeV (that undergoes an exotic decay) or a heavier BSM Higgs
boson. The X particle can be a generic LLP. In most H → XX scenarios discussed in this paper,
however, the X is specifically a long-lived scalar particle, denoted S. The masses of the H and
X/S, as well as the lifetime and decay mode of the X/S, are specified, according to the context,
in Sections 6 and 7.

X/S

p
H
p

X/S
Figure 4: Diagram for the H → XX or H → SS process.
Figure 5 shows the diagram for the H → Z D Z D process, which arises in a hidden Abelian
Higgs model (HAHM) [90]. Here, H D is the dark Higgs boson (generated with a mass of
400 GeV), which mixes with the 125 GeV SM Higgs boson via the mixing parameter κ, taken
here to be 0.01, and gives mass to the long-lived dark photon Z D . The Z D is generated with
masses between 10 and 60 GeV, and the Z–Z D kinetic mixing parameter ϵ is varied between
10−7 and 2 × 10−9 . One Z D is required to decay into two muons, but the decay of the other
Z D is not restricted. The branching fraction of Z D → µµ depends on the mass; for the masses
considered in this paper, it is around 10%. Thus, in about 10% of the generated H → Z D Z D

17
events, the second Z D decays into muons as well, providing events with four muons.

µ+

H

µ−

ZD

κ
HD

ZD

f̄

f
Figure 5: Diagram for the H → Z D Z D process.
Figure 6 shows the diagram for a gauge-mediated SUSY breaking (GMSB) model where a pair
e subsequently decays to a τ lepton and a
of tau sleptons (e
τ ) is directly produced, and each τ
0
e
e is generated for masses between 100 and 500 GeV and cτ
neutralino χe1 or gravitino G. The τ
values of 0.01 to 1 m.
τ−
p

p

τe

e
χ
e01 /G
e
χ
e01 /G

τe
τ+

e pair production process, with each τ
e decaying to a τ lepton
Figure 6: Diagram for the direct τ
e
and a neutralino χe01 (or a gravitino G).

Figure 7 shows an example diagram for another GMSB SUSY model, commonly referred to as
the “Snowmass Points and Slopes 8” (SPS8) benchmark model [91], in which pair-produced
e which is
squarks and gluinos undergo cascade decays and eventually produce a gravitino G,
the lightest SUSY particle, and as such is stable and weakly interacting. In this benchmark
model, the lightest neutralino χe01 is the next-to-lightest SUSY particle, and its nature largely
determines the phenomenology of the cascade decay chains. The mass of the χe01 is linearly
related to the effective scale of SUSY breaking Λ. Depending on the value of Λ, the coupling of
e could be weak and lead to long χe0 lifetimes. A benchmark Λ value of 100 TeV
the χe01 to the G
1
e and a photon,
is generated for cτ values of 10 and 1000 cm. The χe01 dominantly decays to G
miss
resulting in a final state with one or two photons and pT . The dominant squark-pair and
gluino-pair production modes also result in additional energetic jets.
Figure 8 shows a diagram for a dark-sector scenario with a small mass splitting between a dark
matter candidate χ0 and a charged dark partner χ± [92]. The small mass splitting induces the
dark partners to be long lived, decaying via an off-shell W boson to a dark-matter candidate.

18

q
p

p

γ

e
q/e
g

χ
e01

e
G

χ
e01

e
q/e
g

γ

e
G

q

e and
Figure 7: Diagram for the GMSB SPS8 benchmark model, where pair-produced squarks q
e
e undergo cascade decays and eventually produce a gravitino G.
gluinos g

At the LHC, this benchmark model would produce low-pT particles (e.g., leptons, as used
±
here) and pmiss
T . Simulated samples are generated for a benchmark χ mass of 220 GeV, a mass
0
splitting of 20 GeV, and χ cτ values of 3, 30, and 300 cm.

χ0
p

χ
Z/γ

p

χ

ℓ+

+

−

W+

ν

W−

ν
ℓ−
χ0

Figure 8: Diagram for the singlet-triplet Higgs portal dark matter benchmark model, where a
charged dark partner particle χ± in a compressed dark sector decays via an off-shell W boson
and produces a stable neutral dark matter candidate χ0 .

6

Long-lived particle trigger algorithms and efficiencies

In this section, we describe the CMS LLP trigger program, namely, the trigger algorithms
specifically designed to collect events that could contain LLPs. The rates provided throughout this publication correspond to an instantaneous luminosity of 2.1 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 , unless
otherwise specified. The “pure” rate of a trigger, corresponding to events that only pass this
trigger and do not pass other triggers, is sometimes indicated, but usually, we present the “total” rate of a trigger, corresponding to all events that pass this trigger, regardless of whether or
not they are also selected by other triggers.
The total and pure rates of LLP triggers are shown in Table 1. The rates are calculated from
a single run taken on October 4, 2024 (run 386593), which had a constant instantaneous luminosity of 2.1 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 and a mean PU of 63.6. These instantaneous luminosity and mean
PU values were typical of the maximum output of the LHC during a pp collision fill in 2024,
although the peak instantaneous luminosity achieved in this year was 2.3 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 . This

6.1

19

Summary of new long-lived particle triggers for Run 3

run lasted 4 hours and 17 minutes, during which time an integrated luminosity of 299 pb−1
was recorded. In this table, the pure rates correspond to the unique events added from the
logical OR of all the dedicated LLP HLT paths, on top of the rate from the logical OR of the
rest of the CMS HLT paths. The pure rate, therefore, quantifies the rate of completely new
events recorded by these triggers that would otherwise not be collected by CMS. The total rate
of the LLP triggers accounts for about 10, 5, and 18% of the total rate collected by CMS in the
standard, parking, and scouting data-taking streams, respectively. Most of the rate saved by
LLP triggers is pure, constituting around 79, 78, and 90% of the total rate of LLP triggers in the
standard, parking, and scouting data-taking streams, respectively, further demonstrating the
extension of the CMS physics sensitivity achieved with these triggers. In addition to providing the total and pure rates in the standard, parking, and scouting data-taking streams, Table 1
reports the rates for the logical OR of the standard and parking data-taking streams, which represents the rate of fully reconstructed events. The overlap between standard and parking LLP
triggers, which is concentrated in the displaced- and delayed-jet paths, has been addressed for
recent data taking.
Table 1: The total and pure HLT rate of all dedicated LLP triggers, as calculated from 2024
data for an instantaneous luminosity of 2.1 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 , with a mean PU of 63.6. Rates are
reported for triggers in the standard, parking, and scouting data-taking streams separately, as
well as for the combined standard and parked data to show the rate of all events that are fully
reconstructed. The total rates include events that may or may not have been selected by other
triggers, while the pure rates correspond to events that pass dedicated LLP HLT paths and
do not pass non-LLP HLT paths. The pure rates are measured separately with standard and
parked data. The combined rates are less than the sum of the separate standard and parking
rates because some events overlap. Each rate shown has a statistical uncertainty of less than
1%.
Data stream

Total rate [Hz]

Pure rate [Hz]

Standard
Parking
Scouting

393
234
4200

311
182
3800

Full reconstruction: standard or parking

586

389

The various LLP trigger algorithms are outlined in Table 2. In this section, we describe the
algorithms and any important updates or new triggers introduced for the Run 3 data-taking
period, show their rates and efficiencies, and mention the analyses that make use of these triggers. The trigger efficiencies shown throughout this section are usually measured in simulation
or control regions in data, and the efficiencies are typically shown with respect to offline object quantities, such as jet pT or muon d0 . Later, Section 7 gives the acceptance of the different
LLP triggers in signal simulation within a defined fiducial region as a function of LLP cτ or
decay position, to demonstrate the complementarity of the different triggers. We first summarize the new LLP triggers introduced for Run 3 in Section 6.1. We then provide the descriptions of the algorithms, organized into four subsections: tracker-based algorithms (Section 6.2),
calorimeter-based algorithms (Section 6.3), muon spectrometer-based algorithms (Section 6.4),
and No-BPTX algorithms (Section 6.5).

6.1

Summary of new long-lived particle triggers for Run 3

At the start of Run 3, a few hundred Hz of additional trigger rate at the HLT was allocated for
new LLP triggers. The overall CMS physics program was significantly expanded to explore

20

Table 2: The LLP triggers and their total HLT rates in Run 3, calculated from 2024 data for an
instantaneous luminosity of 2.1 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 , with a mean PU of 63.6. Triggers implemented
for the first time in Run 3 are indicated by a dagger († ). Rate values in parentheses correspond
to the parked data rates; all others are standard data rates, except for dimuon scouting. Nearly
all rates shown have a statistical uncertainty of less than 1 Hz. “Disp.” is an abbreviation for
“displaced”; “req.” for “requirement”; and “NHEF” for “neutral hadron energy fraction”. The
terms used in this table are explained in the corresponding subsection within Section 6.
Triggered signature

Trigger description

HLT rate [Hz]

Disappearing track

pmiss
> 105 GeV + ≥1 isolated track (pT > 50 GeV)
T

4

Disp. tau

≥2 disp. τ h (pT > 32 GeV, d0 > 0.005 cm)†
≥1 disp. τ h (pT > 24 GeV) + ≥1 µ (pT > 24 GeV)†
≥1 disp. τ h (pT > 34 GeV) + ≥1 e (pT > 34 GeV)†

36

Disp. jet

≥2 jet (pT > 40 GeV, inclusive tagging req.) + HT > 430 GeV
≥2 jet (pT > 40 GeV, disp. tagging req.)
+ HT > 240 GeV + ≥1 L1 µ (pT > 6 GeV)

53 (163)

HCAL-based disp.
and delayed jet

≥2 jet (pT > 40 GeV, displ. tagging req.) + HT > 170 GeV†
≥2 jet (pT > 40 GeV, inclusive tagging req.) + HT > 200 GeV†
≥1 jet (pT > 60 GeV, NHEF > 0.7) + HT > 200 GeV†

35

ECAL-based delayed jet

≥1 inclusive and trackless jet†

37 (77)

≥1 γ (pT > 60 GeV) + PF HT > 350 GeV

12

Delayed diphoton
Disp. photon + HT

≥2 ECAL superclusters (time >1 ns)†

15

> 1 cm)†

Disp. single-muon
and dimuon

≥2 L2 µ (pT > 10 GeV, d0
≥2 L3 µ (pT > 16, 10 GeV, d0 > 0.01 cm)†
≥2 L2 µ (pT > 23 GeV)
≥1 L2 µ (pT > 50 GeV, d0 > 1 cm)†
≥1 L3 µ (pT > 30 GeV, d0 > 0.01 cm)†

165

Double disp. L3 muon

≥2 L3 µ (pT > 43 GeV)

2

Disp. L3 muon + photon

≥1 L3 µ (pT > 43 GeV) + γ (pT > 43 GeV)
≥1 L3 µ (pT > 38 GeV, d0 > 1 cm) + γ (pT > 38 GeV)

5

Dimuon scouting

≥2 scouting µ (pT > 3 GeV)

4200

MDS in CSCs

≥1 CSC cluster (≥200/500 hits in outer/inner rings)†
≥2 CSC clusters (≥75 hits)†

14

MDS in CSCs + X

≥1 CSC cluster (≥100 hits) + ≥1 e (pT > 5 GeV)†
≥1 CSC cluster (≥100 hits) + ≥1 L3 µ (pT > 5 GeV)†
≥1 CSC cluster (≥100 hits) + ≥1 τ h (pT > 10 GeV)†
≥1 CSC cluster (≥50 hits) + ≥1 γ (pT > 20 GeV)†

14

MDS in DTs

L1 pmiss
> 150 GeV + ≥1 DT cluster (≥50 hits)†
T
≥1 L1 CSC cluster + ≥1 DT cluster (≥50 hits)†

9

Jet No-BPTX

≥1 out-of-time jet (E > 60 GeV)

1

Muon No-BPTX

≥1 out-of-time L2 µ (pT > 40 GeV)

7

6.2

Tracker-based algorithms

21

this type of new and unconventional physics signatures. We mention which triggers are new
for Run 3 in the following, and then describe the entire LLP trigger program in detail, starting
from Section 6.2. Additional information can be found in Refs. [93–97].
The HLT paths for hadronically decaying displaced tau leptons are new for Run 3. These paths,
which feature a dedicated reconstruction algorithm, are described in Section 6.2.2.
In addition, there are now several flavors of displaced- and delayed-jet triggers available at the
HLT in Run 3. As described in Section 6.2.3, some of the displaced-jet triggers were already
available to a certain extent in Run 2, but have benefited from major improvements over time,
while the delayed-jet triggers, described in Sections 6.3.1 and 6.3.2, are completely new for
Run 3. The signal efficiency for the displaced-jet triggers was improved (Section 6.2.3), especially for low-mass LLPs by making particular use of the new L1Ts that use HCAL timing and
depth information (Section 6.3.1). There are also new HLT paths that exploit the timing of the
electromagnetic calorimeter (Section 6.3.2).
Triggers for displaced muons at the HLT have also been improved in Run 3. Displaced dimuon
high-level triggers take L1 muons with low pT thresholds and new displaced double muon
triggers as input. These L1 muons feed into several types of displaced dimuon triggers at the
HLT, designed to cover a wide range of displacements and improve the signal efficiency over
that of Run 2. These displaced dimuon triggers are further described in Section 6.4.1.
In addition, as described in Section 6.4.4, the dimuon scouting triggers were improved in Run 3
to increase their efficiency for displaced muons.
Neutral LLPs with particularly long lifetimes could decay beyond the calorimeters, creating a
high-multiplicity shower in the muon system. Such a muon detector shower (MDS) is expected
to consist of hundreds of hits with no reconstructed tracks or jets in the direction of the cluster of
hits. New MDS triggers at L1 have been developed for Run 3 to collect these high-multiplicity
events in the CSCs and provide input to triggers at the HLT. Several MDS HLT paths were
developed, reconstructing clusters in both the CSCs (described in Section 6.4.5) and the DTs
(described in Section 6.4.6).

6.2

Tracker-based algorithms

Here, LLP triggers that primarily employ tracking algorithms are described. These include pmiss
T -based triggers for disappearing tracks (Section 6.2.1), displaced-tau triggers (Section 6.2.2), and displaced-jet triggers (Section 6.2.3).
6.2.1

The pmiss
-based disappearing-track triggers
T

For the disappearing-track analysis [17], specialized trigger algorithms were developed in
Run 2. The analysis searches for a disappearing-track signature, i.e., a track made by a charged
particle that lives sufficiently long to decay into undetectable particles inside the volume of the
tracker. This track can recoil off a jet produced from initial-state radiation (ISR) and is highly
isolated, producing a small amount of deposited
√ energy in the calorimeter (Ecalo ) associated
with the track, calculated in a cone of ∆R ≡ (∆η ) 2 + (∆ϕ) 2 < 0.5 around it, and at least
three missing hits in the outermost region of the tracking detector. Tracks are described as having a missing hit if they are reconstructed as passing through a functional tracker layer, but no
hit in that layer is associated with the track. A missing hit is described as “inner” if the missing
layer is between the IP and the innermost hit of the track, “middle” if between the innermost
and outermost hits of the track, and “outer” if it is beyond the outermost hit of the track. It
is possible to have more than one hit per layer. Offline, the disappearing track must have a

22
large number of missing outer hits. Given that there is no tracking in the L1T, a disappearingmiss and an
track trigger must rely on only calorimeter pmiss
(calo pmiss
T
T ), and a combination of pT
isolated track at the HLT. A diagram of a signal event is shown in Fig. 9.

χ01

π±

χ±
1
χ∓
1
χ01
π∓
ISR jet
Figure 9: Diagram of a disappearing-track event. Each χe1± (solid red lines) is an LLP that decays
in the tracker and recoils off an ISR jet (multiple solid green lines), while the χe01 (dashed yellow
line) is undetected, and the π ± (blue curve) is not reconstructed because of its low pT . The
recoil of the disappearing track against the ISR jet produces measurable calorimeter and PF
pmiss
T .
The disappearing-track triggers in Run 3 use the logical OR of several L1 seeds to select events
miss > 70 GeV. The HLT algorithm starts with the calo pmiss
with relatively high pmiss
T , that is, pT
T
miss
reconstruction and requires pT > 105 GeV to reject a large fraction of events and increase the
speed of the algorithm. For events that pass this requirement, isolated tracks are reconstructed
and required to have:

• Ecalo < 100 GeV;
• relative isolation (I), quantified by requiring the scalar sum of the pT of all other
tracks within ∆R < 0.3 of the candidate track must be <5% of the candidate track
pT (I < 0.05);
• number of missing inner hits = 0;
• number of missing middle hits = 0;
• total number of hits > 5;
• pT > 50 GeV.

The total rate of this HLT path is 4 Hz.

The efficiency of the HLT path is evaluated by selecting events that contain significant pmiss
T
(coming from the neutrino) and an isolated track (coming from the muon), using data containing at least one muon, and a simulated W → ℓ ν sample. The efficiency is also calculated
with the AMSB signal benchmark model, whose associated diagram is shown in Fig. 3 and described in Section 5, for three different values of LLP cτ. Given the small difference between the
chargino and the neutralino masses (∆m(χe1± , χe01 ) ∼ mπ ± ), the outgoing SM particle does not

6.2

23

Tracker-based algorithms

have sufficient energy for it to be reconstructed as a track in the detector, and the chargino cτ
is large enough for it to travel through the inner layers of the tracker subdetector. In addition,
the neutralino does not interact with the CMS detector material. This signature is the target of
the disappearing-track analysis: a charged particle track that vanishes inside the volume of the
tracker.
To calculate the efficiency, charginos with a mass of 900 GeV, the smallest chargino mass not yet
excluded by the disappearing-track search, are used, together with three distinct cτ values: 10,
100, and 1000 cm. The efficiency is calculated as the number of events passing a given HLT path,
divided by the total number of events. Table 3 shows the offline requirements applied when
calculating the efficiency in data and simulation. To study the trigger efficiency, requirements
are applied to data and simulated W → ℓ ν events to select a control sample of muons. Different
requirements are applied to the signal simulation to obtain a sample of candidate disappearing
tracks. This second set of requirements emulates the offline analysis requirement for the events
to have an isolated, high-pT track. In the table, the tight muon identification [29] refers to global
muons that have a certain number of muon chamber hits included in the global-muon track fit,
pixel tracker, tracker layers, and matched muon station segments, specifically >1, >1, >10
and >2, respectively. Tight muons are also required to be consistent with the PV by having
d0 < 0.2 cm and χ2 /Ndof < 10 with respect to the global muon fit, where Ndof is the number of
degrees of freedom of the fit. The identification of tracks with high purity is performed with a
deep neural network [98]. This deep neural network algorithm makes use of several kinematic
and geometric parameters of the track and its hits, and its identification value is assigned based
on the score of the network.
Table 3: Offline event requirements for the disappearing-track trigger efficiency calculation,
for data and W → ℓ ν simulation (left) and signal simulation (right). The selection criteria are
applied sequentially over the given objects, and an event is selected if at least one object per
event passes all requirements.
Data and W → ℓ ν simulation
Object
Selection

Signal simulation
Object
Selection

≥1 HLT muon

≥1 track

≥1 muon

pT > 24 GeV
passing isolation
pT > 55 GeV
|η | < 2.1
passing tight muon ID
I < 0.15
missing inner hits = 0
missing middle hits = 0
match HLT muon (∆R < 0.1)

|η | < 2.5
passing high purity ID
d0 < 0.02 cm
dz < 0.5 cm
hits ≥4
missing inner hits = 0
missing middle hits = 0
I < 0.01

Figure 10 (left) shows the overall efficiency of the main disappearing-track HLT path in χe1± →
χe01 + X simulated events, for cτ = 10, 100, and 1000 cm. The efficiency is shown without
applying corrections that improve the agreement between the simulation and the data. The
miss, µ
/
events in this figure are required to have pT
> 120 GeV (described in Section 4.7) to replicate
the disappearing-track search selection. The efficiency is plotted as a function of the number
of layers with valid measurements of the track that pass the offline selection. This illustrates
the different efficiencies for tracks of different sizes, reflecting the subdivisions of the signal
region in the search. The figure shows that the chargino proper lifetime has a large impact on
the efficiency. For the 10 cm cτ line in particular, the efficiency is smaller in the “4 layers” than
in the “5 layers” case, even though most of these tracks would disappear before the fifth layer

24

(13.6 TeV)

1
0.9

CMS Simulation

0
±
∼
χ →∼
χ +X
0.8 1 m ±1 = 900 GeV, c τ = 10 cm
∼
χ
1
mχ∼ ± = 900 GeV, c τ = 100 cm
0.7
1
m∼χ ± = 900 GeV, c τ = 1000 cm

0.6

1

0.5

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

of the tracker detector, in contrast to the behavior observed for larger cτ values. This smaller
efficiency comes from requiring a minimum of 5 hits in the online tracks. The efficiencies are
estimated with offline tracks that are reconstructed using more sophisticated algorithms. This
step can cause some of the offline tracks to have 4 layers with measurements, even when the
HLT track has 5 hits.
1
0.9

0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1
yers

5 la

yers

6+ l

aye Inclusi
ve
rs

W→lν

0.5

0.2

4 la

2023 data

0.6

0.4

yers

2022 data

0.7

0.3

3 la

CMS

0.8

0.4

0

34.1 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

0

40

100

200

miss, µ

PF p

T

1000
[GeV]

Figure 10: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the disappearing-track trigger: Efficiency as a function
of the number of tracker layers with valid measurements for tracks that pass the offline requirements described in Table 3, in χe1± → χe01 + X simulated events for 2022 conditions, where
mχe± = 900 GeV and χe01 is nearly mass-degenerate with χe1± (left). The efficiency is shown for
1

LLPs with cτ = 10, 100, and 1000 cm in black circles, blue squares, and red triangles, respectively. Comparison of efficiencies calculated with 2022 data (black circles), 2023 data (blue
squares), and W → ℓ ν simulation (red triangles), as a function of offline reconstructed PF
miss, µ
/
pT
(right). The efficiency rises to a plateau of less than 100% because of the isolated track
leg of the algorithm.
Figure 10 (right) shows the overall efficiency of the main disappearing-track HLT path in 2022
and 2023 data and in the W → ℓ ν background simulation. The overall efficiency is defined
as the number of events that pass the offline selection, specified in Table 3, combined with
events satisfying the disappearing-track HLT path (including the L1T, HLT pmiss
T , and HLT
isolated-track requirements), divided by the number of events that pass the offline selection
alone. Because the disappearing-track triggers use calo pmiss
T , the efficiency is measured with
miss, µ
/
respect to the offline pT
.
The overall efficiency is the convolution of the per-leg efficiencies, which are shown in Fig. 11.
The L1T+HLT pmiss
T -leg efficiency as shown in Fig. 11 (left) is defined as the number of events
that pass the offline selection from Table 3 and the L1T and HLT pmiss
requirements, divided
T
by the number of events that pass the offline selection from Table 3. The isolated track leg
efficiency as shown in Fig. 11 (right) is defined as the number of events that pass the offline
selection from Table 3 and the disappearing-track HLT path (including the L1T, HLT pmiss
T ,
and HLT isolated-track requirements), divided by the number of events that pass the offline
selection from Table 3 and the L1T and HLT pmiss
requirements.
T
The overall efficiency curve in Fig. 10 (right) does not reach 100% because of the selections
made in the isolated track leg of the HLT path, as shown in Fig. 11 (right), and also because the

6.2

25

Tracker-based algorithms

HLT isolated track efficiency

1

CMS
2022 data

0.8

2023 data

T

L1T+HLT pmiss efficiency

34.1 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

W→lν

0.6
0.4

1
0.9

34.1 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

2022 data
2023 data
W→lν

0.3
0.2

0.2

0.1

0

40

100

200

miss, µ

PF p

T

1000
[GeV]

0

40

100

200

1000
Muon p [GeV]
T

Figure 11: The L1T+HLT efficiency of each leg of the disappearing-track trigger in 2022 data
(black circles), 2023 data (blue squares), and W → ℓ ν simulation (red triangles). Efficiency of
miss, µ
/
the L1T+HLT pmiss
leg as a function of offline reconstructed PF pT
(left). Efficiency of the
T
full HLT path, taking into account only events that already passed through the pmiss
leg, as a
T
function of the selected muon pT (right).
HLT tracking efficiency does not reach 100% [61].
The efficiencies in 2022 and 2023 data are very similar, but there is a large discrepancy between
data and simulation in Fig. 10 (right) and Fig. 11 (right). This difference comes from higher
efficiencies in simulation in the HLT selections on the track isolation and the number of missing
inner and middle hits. When measuring these properties offline, 9.2% more simulated events
than data events pass these requirements. The differences between the trigger efficiencies in
the simulation and the data are corrected in the offline analysis.
miss, µ
/

The disappearing-track signature may also be triggered by standard pT
triggers, since those
miss
also target events containing a large amount of calo pT . However, the disappearing-track
triggers increase the efficiency to trigger on the disappearing tracks, in part because they lower
miss, µ
/
miss, µ
/
the threshold on pT
from 110 GeV in the standard pT
triggers to 105 GeV. Using stanmiss, µ
/
dard pT
triggers in logical OR with the disappearing-track triggers to select simulated signal events provides access to additional parameter space for a small increase in rate, with remiss, µ
/
spect to using standard pT
triggers alone.
6.2.2

Displaced-tau triggers

Displaced tau leptons represent a well-motivated signature in many BSM theories, particularly
some GMSB models [99–101] that include the process described in Section 5 and shown in
Fig. 6. About one-third of the time, the tau lepton will decay into a displaced muon or displaced electron, and two neutrinos. Dedicated HLT reconstruction techniques are available for
displaced muons, as described in Sections 6.4.1 and 6.4.2, while for displaced electrons, the
options available at the HLT are to select superclusters as described in Section 6.3.3 or photons
as proxies for displaced electrons, as described in Section 6.4.3. Almost all the remaining tau
lepton decay possibilities result in final states containing hadrons and a neutrino. The reconstruction of displaced τ h candidates is particularly challenging, both at the offline and trigger

26
levels. There was no online τ h reconstruction sequence in CMS addressing this topology in
Run 2, and the previous search [102] had to rely on a combination of pmiss
T -based triggers and
prompt di-τ h triggers to select events with at least one of the final state tau leptons decaying
hadronically. Figure 12 shows an event display of a simulated GMSB benchmark signal event,
with two τ h particles in the final state.
~
χ 01

jet
τ-

~
τ

—
~
τ

τ+

~
χ 01

jet

e pair production in a GMSB benchmark model, folFigure 12: Event display of simulated τ
e to a τ lepton and a neutralino χe01 , with the τ leptons decaying
lowed by the decay of each τ
e particles, the light blue lines indicate the neuhadronically. The magenta lines indicate the τ
tralinos, and the red lines indicate the τ leptons decaying hadronically. The shaded dark yellow
cones show the two reconstructed jets, and the orange lines inside the jets are the hadrons from
the τ decay.
A dedicated set of HLT paths targeting the direct reconstruction of displaced τ h has been designed and included for the Run 3 data taking. This displaced τ h algorithm uses a combination
of a tracking iteration that uses only hits in the silicon strip detector and not the pixel detector to seed the track reconstruction, the standard tracking, and a modified τ h reconstruction
algorithm.
Studies performed on the standard L1 τ h reconstruction algorithm have shown that it was not
necessary to develop a dedicated displaced τ h L1 seed. This is because the L1 τ h reconstruction
algorithm does not depend on tracking information. As long as the τ h decays before the surface
of the ECAL, it will leave energy deposits in the calorimeter, and the L1 τ h reconstruction will
be efficient. Therefore, the HLT displaced reconstruction is seeded by standard L1 τ h objects.
The dedicated displaced reconstruction is a modification of the standard HPS τ h reconstruction algorithm, which is described in Section 4.6 and is used in the third step of the online
reconstruction of promptly decaying τ h particles. To enable the HPS algorithm to reconstruct
displaced τ h particles, the standard tracking algorithm has been extended to include a dedicated displaced iteration that starts from a seed consisting of a combination of hits in the strip
tracker alone and builds tracks without assuming their provenance from the IP. To meet the
CPU constraints, this iteration is only used in regions around isolated L2 tau leptons. Modifications to the HPS algorithm itself have also been introduced. The standard algorithm includes
requirements that the τ h constituents (charged and neutral hadrons) should originate from the
IP, effectively preventing the reconstruction of displaced τ h objects. These requirements have
therefore been loosened.
A suite of trigger paths using the modified HPS algorithm has been developed, targeting final states with two τ h or with one τ h and one displaced lepton. In the di-τ h path, each τ h

6.2

27

Tracker-based algorithms

CMS Simulation
pp → ∼τ∼τ (∼τ → τχ∼0), m(∼τ) = 100 GeV, cτ = 100 mm

0.4

displaced di-τh paths

pmiss paths
T

prompt di-τh paths

pmiss OR prompt di-τh paths
T

displaced di-τh OR pmiss OR prompt di-τh paths
T

L1+HLT efficiency

L1+HLT efficiency

(13.6 TeV)

(13.6 TeV)

0.9
0.8

CMS Simulation
pp → ∼τ∼τ (∼τ → τχ∼0), m(∼τ) = 100 GeV, cτ = 100 mm

0.7

displaced di-τh paths

pmiss paths

0.6

prompt di-τh paths

pmiss OR prompt di-τh paths

0.5

T

T

displaced di-τh OR pmiss OR prompt di-τh paths
T

0.4
0.2

0.3
0.2

0

0

50
40
30
20
10
0

50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10−1

1

10
Gen.-level τ d0 [cm]

Improvement (%)

Improvement (%)

0.1

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800

Gen.-level pmiss [GeV]
T

eτ
e (τ
e →
Figure 13: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the displaced τ h trigger, for simulated pp → τ
e has cτ = 10 cm and each τ decays hadronically. The efficiency is
τ χe01 ) events, where the τ
shown as a function of the d0 of the highest pT τ lepton in the event (left) and as a function
of pmiss
(right). The efficiency is shown for the displaced di-τ h trigger path (blue filled trianT
gles), the previously available pmiss
T -based paths (orange open circles), the previously available
prompt di-τ h paths (purple open squares), the combination of the pmiss
T -based and prompt
di-τ h paths (gray open triangles), and the combination of the pmiss
-based,
prompt di-τ h , and
T
displaced di-τ h paths (red filled circles), using 2022 data-taking conditions. The efficiency is
evaluated with respect to events that contain at least two generator-level τ leptons, where the
visible component of the τ lepton pT is greater than 30 GeV and |η | < 2.1. The lower panels
show the ratio (improvement in %) of the trigger efficiency given by the combination of the
displaced di-τ h trigger path with the pmiss
T -based and prompt di-τ h paths to that of the combination of the previously available pmiss
T -based and prompt di-τ h paths.
is required to have d0 > 0.005 cm and pT > 32 GeV. The cross-flavor paths, which require
pT (τ h ) > 24 (34) GeV and pT (ℓ) > 24 (34) GeV for the muon (electron) flavor, have been available online since 2024. The total rate of these HLT paths is 36 Hz.
eτ
e (τ
e → τ χe01 ) events, for 2022
Figure 13 shows the trigger efficiency in simulated pp → τ
e having cτ = 10 cm and each τ decaying hadronically. The
data-taking conditions, with the τ
efficiencies are given for the previously available Run 2 pmiss
T -based and prompt di-τ h paths,
the displaced di-τ h , and the combination of these paths. A relative improvement of around
30% in efficiency is found for d0 values up to 1 cm, progressively decreasing to close to zero for
a d0 of 10 cm; at low values of pmiss
T , where the previously available triggers are not efficient,
the improvement is as large as 45%, gradually decreasing for pmiss
> 100 GeV. The displaced
T
di-τ h path is optimized for d0 values up to 1 cm.
Figure 14 shows the rates of the trigger path in 2022 and 2023, as functions of PU. The plots
indicate a linear rate response with respect to PU.

14

26.7 fb 1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

HLT rate [Hz]

HLT rate [Hz]

28

14

12

CMS

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

00

9.5 fb 1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

PU

00

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

PU

Figure 14: Total rate of the displaced τ h trigger for a few representative runs in 2022 (left) and
2023 (right) data, as a function of PU.
6.2.3

Displaced-jet triggers using the tracker

A suite of displaced-jet triggers was already available in Run 2 [103], utilizing the tracking information available at the HLT. Displaced jets are identified, or “tagged”, in the HLT as jets with
a small number of prompt tracks or with the presence of displaced tracks. With these triggers,
the Run 2 [103] and Run 3 [11] displaced-jet searches set stringent limits on a large number of
BSM models with hadronically decaying LLPs and with LLP masses as low as O(100 GeV), including split SUSY [104–110], GMSB [99–101], and R-parity violating SUSY [111–117], covering
a variety of final-state topologies. Such displaced-jet signatures are well-motivated in many
BSM scenarios, especially those involving Higgs-portal hidden sectors. Figure 15 displays a
simulated H → SS → qqqq event with mS = 55 GeV, where one long-lived S decays inside
the tracker, producing a pair of displaced jets accompanied by displaced tracks and a displaced
vertex. The diagram for this process is shown in Fig. 4.
In Run 3, major improvements to the displaced-jet triggers were implemented to increase the
efficiencies for low-mass LLPs with masses smaller than 100 GeV, such as those expected in the
exotic Higgs boson decays. The main improvements are in the tracking-based displaced-jet tagging requirements. Displaced jets are tagged at the HLT using two types of requirements. The
first requires calo jets with at most one associated prompt track, referred to as the “inclusive”
tagging requirement. Prompt tracks are tracks that have pT > 1 GeV and d0 measured with
respect to the PV smaller than 0.5 mm. Tracks are associated with the calo jets by requiring the
angular distance ∆R between a given track and a given jet to be smaller than 0.4. The second requirement, referred to as the “displaced” tagging requirement, starts with the inclusive tagging
requirement and additionally requires that if there is exactly one associated prompt track, there
must also be at least one associated displaced track with pT > 1 GeV and d0 > 0.3 mm. The two
requirements are motivated by two complementary characteristics of exotic LLPs: the lack of
prompt particles accompanying the LLP production and the presence of displaced tracks from
the LLP decays.
Two sets of displaced-jet triggers are implemented in standard data taking: a main set, which
provides most of the data and signal efficiency, and an auxiliary set, which was added to in-

6.2

29

Tracker-based algorithms

Jet
Displaced vertex

Jet

Figure 15: Event display of a simulated pair of displaced jets arising from an LLP decay, producing displaced vertices and tracks. The simulated process is H → SS → qqqq. The blue
curves indicate the reconstructed tracks. The yellow cones indicate two reconstructed jets,
with a number of associated displaced tracks. The jets are reconstructed using the standard
algorithms described in Section 4.5, which assume they originate from the PV. The blue point
indicates the displaced vertex induced by the LLP decay.
crease the signal efficiency. The main displaced-jet trigger is seeded by an HT L1T and then
requires HT > 430 GeV at the HLT, where HT is the scalar sum of pT for all calo jets satisfying
pT > 40 GeV and |η | < 2.5. The trigger also requires the presence of at least two calo jets with
pT > 40 GeV and |η | < 2.0 that pass the inclusive tagging requirement. Since 2023, the HLT
HT threshold of this trigger has been lowered to 390 GeV, with correspondingly lower L1 HT
thresholds, and this set of triggers has been moved to the parked data-taking stream.
The auxiliary set of displaced-jet triggers in standard data taking is seeded by an L1T that
requires HT > 240 GeV and the presence of a muon with pT > 6 GeV, to improve the efficiency
for LLPs with heavy flavor decays. This trigger further requires the presence of at least two
calo jets with pT > 40 GeV and |η | < 2.0 that pass the displaced tagging requirement.

As described in Section 4, the CMS experiment employs an iterative process for track reconstruction, and the displaced tracking iterations are usually not used at the HLT because they
are CPU-intensive. However, a displaced tracking iteration is used in the displaced-jet triggers.
At the same time, similar to the offline tracking, multiple tracking iterations are employed to
reconstruct prompt tracks in the displaced-jet triggers, which helps reduce the trigger rates. To
meet the stringent HLT CPU timing constraints, only the seeds near jets are considered for track
reconstruction in the displaced-jet triggers. Furthermore, the next tracking iteration proceeds
only if a given event has two tagged displaced jets based on the tracks from earlier iterations.

The total HLT rate of these displaced-jet paths is 53 (163) Hz in the standard (parked) datataking stream. The efficiency of the main displaced-jet triggers is shown in Figs. 16–18.
Figure 16 shows the efficiency for a given event to satisfy the HLT HT > 430 GeV (the 2022
minimum threshold) and HT > 390 GeV (the 2023 and later minimum threshold) requirements
measured in data. The measurements are performed using events collected with an isolated
single-muon trigger that requires the presence of a muon with pT > 27 GeV. The efficiency of
the HLT HT > 390 (430) GeV requirement is larger than ≈98% when the offline HT is larger
than 400 (440) GeV. Figure 17 (left) shows the efficiency of an offline calo jet to pass the online
pT requirement in displaced-jet triggers as a function of the offline jet pT . Figure 17 (right)

30

27.9 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

1

CMS

0.8
HLT calorimeter HT > 430 GeV

0.6

HLT efficiency

HLT efficiency

34.7 fb-1 (2022) + 27.9 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)
1

CMS

0.8
HLT calorimeter HT > 390 GeV

0.6

Data 2022
0.4

0.4

Data 2023 before HCAL
conditions update

0.2

Data 2023 after HCAL
conditions update

Data 2023 before HCAL
conditions update
0.2

0
0

Data 2023 after HCAL
conditions update

200

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Offline calorimeter HT [GeV]

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Offline calorimeter HT [GeV]

Figure 16: The HLT efficiency for a given event passing the main displaced-jet trigger to satisfy
HLT calorimeter HT > 430 GeV (left) and HT > 390 GeV (right) as a function of the offline
calorimeter HT . For this trigger, the minimum calorimeter HT threshold was 430 (390) GeV in
2022 (2023 and later). The measurements are performed with data collected in 2022 (green
circles), in 2023 before an update of the HCAL gain values and energy response corrections
(black squares), and in 2023 after the update (blue triangles).
shows the efficiency of an offline calo jet in simulated signal events to pass the online inclusive
tagging requirement as a function of the number of offline prompt tracks.
Figures 16 and 17 show the 2023 data split into two periods: before and after an update of the
HCAL energy response corrections (and a simultaneous minor update to the HCAL readout
gain values). This update of the conditions was primarily made because of a change in the
precision-timing alignment of the HCAL barrel, which increased the energy response. The
change in energy response can impact the trigger efficiency, as observed for the tracking-based
displaced-jet triggers. The trigger efficiencies are generally higher after the update, while the
trigger rates stay around the same.
Figure 18 shows the fraction of displaced b quarks, d quarks, and τ leptons that pass the
displaced-jet tagging requirement at the HLT as a function of the generator-level Lxy , indicating that the displaced-jet triggers have good performance for a variety of final states across
the tracker volume. The overall, per-event trigger efficiencies, which are primarily constrained
by the L1T efficiencies, are ≈0.4–1.0% for H → SS → qqqq signatures with cτ < 1 m. Figure 19 shows the gain in trigger efficiency for the displaced-jet triggers in Run 3 compared to
Run 2. The Run 3 trigger efficiencies are larger than those of Run 2 by a factor of 4 to 17 for
10 < mS < 60 GeV and 1 < cτ < 1000 mm. Compared to the standard unprescaled HT trigger,
which requires HT > 1050 GeV at the HLT, the displaced-jet triggers have more than a factor of
20 higher efficiency for the H → SS → qqqq signatures with cτ ≳ 10 mm.

The data collected with the displaced-jet triggers in 2022 has been analyzed in a Run 3
displaced-jet search [11]. This search has achieved up to a factor of 10 increase in sensitivity
compared to previous searches [103, 118] for H → SS → qqqq signatures, despite analyzing
a data set corresponding to a much smaller integrated luminosity. The full Run 3 data set collected with the displaced-jet triggers is expected to provide further significant improvements
in the CMS sensitivity to this signature.

6.3

31

Calorimeter-based algorithms

1

CMS

0.8
HLT calorimeter jet p > 40 GeV
T

QCD multijet (2022)

0.6

QCD multijet (2023)
0.4

Data 2022
Data 2023 before HCAL
conditions update
Data 2023 after HCAL
conditions update

0.2

0
0

20

40

60

80

100

(13.6 TeV)
HLT per jet tagging efficiency

HLT per jet tagging efficiency

34.7 fb-1 (2022) + 27.9 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

120

Offline calorimeter jet pT [GeV]

1

CMS Simulation
cτ = 10 mm

0.8

cτ = 100 mm
0.6

H → SS, S → bb
mH = 125 GeV, mS = 40 GeV

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of offline prompt tracks

Figure 17: The HLT efficiency of the main displaced-jet trigger: Efficiency of an offline calorimeter jet to (left) pass the online pT requirement in the displaced-jet triggers and (right) to have
at most one HLT prompt track. In the left plot, the HLT calorimeter jets must have pT > 40 GeV.
The efficiency is shown for data collected in 2022 (green squares), in 2023 before an update of
the HCAL gains and energy response corrections (black filled circles), and in 2023 after the
update (blue open circles). The efficiencies measured with QCD multijet simulations are also
shown, for 2022 (red triangles) and 2023 (purple triangles) conditions. These measurements are
performed using events collected with a prescaled trigger that requires HT > 425 GeV at the
HLT. An offline HT > 450 GeV selection is also applied to ensure the prescaled trigger reaches
its plateau. The efficiency is >96% when the offline jet has pT > 40 GeV. The efficiency threshold is lower for the later 2023 data following updates to the HCAL energy corrections and readout gains, although the pT value at the start of the plateau is unchanged. The efficiency in the
right plot is shown for 2022 conditions, as a function of the number of offline prompt tracks, in
simulated H → SS, S → bb signal events where mH = 125 GeV and mS = 40 GeV. Two proper
decay lengths of the S particle are shown: cτ = 10 mm (green circles) and cτ = 100 mm (blue
squares). For jets in signal events, when the number of offline prompt tracks is <4, the tagging
efficiency is larger than 70%.

6.3

Calorimeter-based algorithms

We now describe the LLP trigger algorithms that feature calorimeter information. In this section, we cover displaced-jet triggers that use the HCAL (Section 6.3.1), delayed-jet triggers
that use ECAL timing (Section 6.3.2), delayed-diphoton triggers (Section 6.3.3), and displacedphoton + HT triggers (Section 6.3.4).
6.3.1

Displaced-jet triggers using the HCAL

The recent Phase I upgrade to the CMS HCAL [38] introduced both depth segmentation and
precision cell timing via a time-to-digital converter (TDC) in the HCAL barrel (HB). Although
the primary motivation for these enhancements is to maintain high efficiencies for particle identification in increasingly high-PU environments, both aspects of this upgrade also enable the
identification of displaced- and delayed-jet signatures. Making full use of the upgraded HCAL
requires new algorithms for the L1T, where the new HCAL depth and timing information are
available. Unlike many other triggers presented in this paper, this required implementing new

32

HLT per-parton tagging efficiency

(13.6 TeV)
CMS Simulation
H → SS, S → bb/dd/ τ+τmH = 125 GeV, mS = 40 GeV

1

b quark
d quark

b/d/τ
Gen.-level p > 40 GeV, |η| < 2.0

τ lepton

T

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

10−1

1

10

102

Gen.-level parton production vertex Lxy [cm]

Figure 18: The HLT efficiency of the main displaced-jet trigger for 2022 conditions, for H →
SS signal events where mH = 125 GeV and mS = 40 GeV. The per-parton (quark or lepton)
HLT displaced-jet tagging efficiency as a function of the generator-level Lxy of the parton is
shown for displaced b quarks (blue circles), d quarks (purple triangles), and τ leptons (green
squares) with pT > 40 GeV and |η | < 2.0. Events are required to satisfy the HLT HT > 430 GeV
requirement.

L1 + HLT efficiency ratio

(13 and 13.6 TeV)
103

CMS Simulation
Run 3 displaced-jets trigger efficiency
Run 2 displaced-jets trigger efficiency

102

H → SS, S → bb
mH = 125 GeV

mS = 55 GeV
mS = 40 GeV
mS = 15 GeV

10

1
10−1

1

10

102

cτ [cm]

Figure 19: The ratio between the Run 3 displaced-jet trigger efficiency and the Run 2 displacedjet trigger efficiency as a function of LLP cτ, in simulated H → SS, S → bb signal events where
mH = 125 GeV and mS = 15 (blue triangles), 40 (green squares), or 55 (red circles) GeV. The
Run 3 displaced-jet trigger efficiencies are measured for 2022 conditions.
hardware-level LLP jet trigger algorithms that seed displaced- and delayed-jet HLT paths.
This section focuses on a novel L1T targeting LLPs that decay hadronically before or within
the HB volume. The targeted signature is illustrated in Fig. 20. The signal model used to
evaluate the trigger performance is an exotic decay of the Higgs boson (or decay of a highmass, exotic Higgs boson) that produces two scalar LLPs (S), which each decay into two b

pgrade

1dcap
motivation
overview
view
upgrade completed in 2018
d in 2018

se,
drifting
response,
and premature
aging of HPDs by replacing with SiPMs.
e aging
of HPDs
by replacing
with SiPMs.
HPD=Hybrid PhotoDetectors
HPD=Hybrid PhotoDetectors
both
HE and
HB
scintillator:
Ds
with
SiPM
6.3 Calorimeter-based
algorithms
33
SiPM=Silicon Photo-Multipliers
SiPM=Silicon
Photo-Multipliers
ency
SiPM,
especially
relevant for
low light levels;
w light
levels;
for
calibration
of depth-dependent
effects.
s,tolerance
light
yield
radiation
tolerance
neffects.
quarks (H &
→ SS
→ bbbb), as shown
in Fig. 4. The scalar S can be long-lived, with a cτ of

the order of meters, permitting decays before and within the HCAL volume. The mass of the
e for jets and
missing transverse energy.
ergy.
scalar particle is constrained to be m < m /2.

erformance
for jets & MET
ET
2018, HB upgrade is carried out during LS2.
S

H

ring LS2.

G0
2

1

15

The L1 HCAL-based LLP triggers significantly increase the LLP acceptance with respect to
standard triggers because of their lower jet pT thresholds. For example, the LLP acceptance is
increased by up to a factor of 4 for a signal with mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, and cτ = 3 m [93].
HCAL
segmentation:
(post-LS2)
These
triggers will be used
in (post-LS2)
an upcoming Run
3 search
for LLPs, whichRun3
relies on
the upgraded
HCAL
segmentation:
Run3
HCAL
segmentation:
2018
HB2 information RING
at both
trigger andRING
analysisRING
levels.
This search
aims to increase
the
0 offline
1
RING
RING 0
RING 1
2
0
1 5 4 RING
RING
211
13
10
910 8 9 7RING
14
12
15
13
10
9
8
7
6
5 4
3 2 1
14
12
11
15
13
8 6 7 decaying
6
5 3 4 2 hadronically
31 2 1
14
12 of
11LLP
coverage
models
in
the
calorimeter
region,
while
also
adding
IRON
HCALHCAL
HO HO IRON IRON
HCAL HO
sensitivity to lower jet and event energies.
MAGNET
COIL COIL
MAGNET

16

0

16

0

HCALHCAL
HF HF

FEE

18 17 1816 17 16
FEE
FEE
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
28
28
17

17

29

MAGNET COIL
HCAL Barrel

HCAL Barrel

16

FEE

0

HCALHCAL
HB HB
HCALHCAL
HE HE

0

29

29

(,

16
16

0

(
HCAL
HF +

)-./-01-2 =

FEE

18 17 16
FEE
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

HCAL HB
HCAL
HE

17

0

29

BEAM LINE HCAL Endcap

(**+

BEAM LINE

Pawel de Barbaro, University of Rochester 2

IP

16
16

b
0

LLP

0

HCAL Endcap

BEAM LINE

IP

2

Figure 20: Diagram showing
the lateral view of a quadrant of the CMS HCAL barrel and endv. 2017-06-A
cap in Run 3. The distinct depth segmentation is indicated by the different colors, where the
HCAL barrel consists of 4 depths and the HCAL endcap has up to 7 depths. A delayed-jet signature is shown (left), where the time delay results from a combination of the low LLP velocity
because of its relatively high mass and the path length difference with respect to a promptly decaying particle. A time delay consists of the path length difference between a particle traveling
from the IP directly to the calorimeter (l), as compared to the LLP path (lLLP ) plus the b quark
path (lb ). Additionally, the LLP may also have a significantly
lower velocity, while other parti5
cles are assumed in this example to be highly relativistic. Thus, the difference in time of arrival

ete
installation
& commissioning
before Dec 2019
missioning
before
Dec 2019

lb

at the calorimeter is ∆t = vlLLP + c − cl . A displaced-jet signature is also depicted (right), reLLP
sulting from an LLP decaying within the HCAL volume to produce significant energy deposits
deeper in the HCAL with minimal energy deposits in shallower calorimeter layers.
The TDC measures timing with 6-bit precision for each HCAL channel that is recorded. This
information is used in the trigger and offline analysis. Within each 25 ns bunch crossing, the
TDC utilizes 6 bits to encode the pulse arrival time, allowing for fifty valid time bins (0–25 ns,
in half-ns steps). Special codes indicate situations where the pulse started above threshold,
never rose above threshold, or there were phase-locked loop errors. Values with any of these
invalid or error codes are excluded from use in the timing requirements in the trigger. Because
of bandwidth constraints in the HB detector readout, each 6-bit TDC address is compressed
into a 2-bit value corresponding to the following four timing ranges: prompt, slightly delayed,
very delayed, and invalid or error. These categories are defined as:

• Prompt: tpulse < 6 ns;
• Slightly delayed: 6 < tpulse < 7 ns;
• Very delayed: 7 < tpulse < 25 ns;
• Invalid pulse: invalid or error code.

The full HB 6-bit TDC cannot be recovered at a later stage (e.g., for offline reconstruction)

5

34
Table 4: The prompt and delayed ranges of the HB TDC timing encoding in 2022–2023 and from
2024 onward. The timing ranges were changed in 2024 to account for the different behavior
observed in depth 1.
Year

Depth

Prompt [ns]

Slightly delayed [ns]

Very delayed [ns]

2022–2023

1–4

0–6

6.5–7

>7.5

2024, onward

1
2–4

0–9
0–6

9.5–12
6.5–9

>12.5
>9.5

because the 6-to-2-bit compression occurs on the data-encoding FPGA before transmitting data
to the off-detector electronics.
In Run 3, the barrel region of HCAL is segmented into four depths, each with time and energy
readouts, as illustrated in Fig. 20. Each HB depth is made of interleaved layers of scintillator
and brass absorber, or stainless steel for the first and last absorbers [38]. To accommodate the
different behavior and pulse shapes observed in the innermost depth, two updates have been
made for 2024 data taking [119]. First, the prompt range for depth 1 is widened to account for
the larger spread of arrival times. Second, the slightly delayed range is extended for all depths,
as the wider range provides a larger sample of events for timing evaluation and alignment. The
timing ranges are shown in Table 4.
The complete information from each of the four HB depth segments cannot be sent off-detector
to the trigger because of bandwidth constraints. Therefore, quantities are calculated per trigger
tower, which is defined as a group of cells across four depths at the same η and ϕ coordinates.
Each tower is assigned a single bit, referred to as the “LLP flag”, which encodes the following
information. A tower will pass the tower LLP flag if it satisfies the criteria for a delayed tower
or a displaced tower. A delayed tower includes at least one delayed cell with energy >4 GeV
and no prompt cells with energy >4 GeV. A displaced tower includes at least one cell in depths
3 or 4 with energy >5 GeV and has both cells in depths 1 and 2 with energy <1 GeV. Any L1 jet
containing at least two LLP-flagged towers within the 9×9 HCAL towers that make up the jet
is labeled as an L1 LLP jet. Additional kinematic selection criteria are applied to L1 LLP jets:
HT > 200 GeV and jet pT > 60 GeV for the lowest unprescaled L1 single LLP jet trigger, and
two jets with pT > 40 GeV with no additional HT requirement for the L1 double LLP jet trigger.
The stringent requirement to identify multiple delayed or displaced towers at L1 permits a
correspondingly lower minimum HT requirement, increasing the sensitivity to a range of LLP
models [99–101, 104–117].
Timing scans in the HCAL have been performed at the start of data taking each year since
2022 to calibrate the HCAL timing. The scans in 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025 collected data
corresponding to integrated luminosities of 42.2, 418.5, 70, and 195 pb−1 , respectively [119].
The first HCAL barrel precision-timing calibration was deployed online in 2023; subsequent
annual calibrations have required only minor, few-ns shifts, demonstrating the stability of the
HCAL time alignment throughout the year and from year to year. The first precision-timing
calibration for the HCAL endcap was deployed in 2025.
These timing scans involve shifting the HCAL timing by known values to produce artificially
delayed jets in collision data, in an approach that is crucial for understanding the detector and
trigger performance. From the timing-scan data, the delayed tower and jet trigger efficiencies
are measured, with the timing resolutions of jets in collisions. Figures 21 and 22 show the
efficiency of the per-tower LLP flag and the per-jet L1 LLP label, demonstrating the high degree

6.3

35

Calorimeter-based algorithms

of sensitivity of these algorithms to jet delay. Jets with an arrival time >6 ns are identified as
delayed, with high efficiency.

L1T HCAL delayed tower efficiency

418.5 pb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)
1

CMS
delayed towers
all valid towers

0.8
Delayed tower, η = 0
Delayed tower, η = 0.65
Delayed tower, η = 1.26

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Timing shift [ns]
Figure 21: The L1T HCAL trigger tower efficiency of the delayed timing towers in the 2023
HCAL timing-scan data, with efficiencies split by trigger towers centered at η ≈ 0 (blue circles),
0.65 (red squares), 1.26 (black triangles), and with width ∆η = 0.087. The sharp rise in efficiency
between timing delays of 0–6 ns is expected, as the prompt timing range includes pulses up to
and including those recorded at a 6 ns arrival time (digitized in half-ns steps by the TDC),
demonstrating the timing trigger performance. The delayed timing towers must have at least
one delayed cell, no prompt cells, and energy >4 GeV. The efficiency is calculated relative to
towers with any valid timing code, meaning the tower contains at least one cell with energy
>4 GeV and a TDC code of prompt, slightly delayed, or very delayed. Multiple delayed or
displaced towers are required for the HCAL-based displaced- and delayed-jet L1T to pass.
Figure 23 shows the L1T efficiency of the HCAL-based LLP jet trigger as a function of offline
HT and calorimeter jet pT . The efficiency is shown for jets matched to LLPs decaying in HCAL
depths 3 and 4, corresponding to 214.2 < R < 295 cm and |η | < 1.26. The efficiency plateau
is reached at 300 GeV in event HT and 125 GeV in calorimeter jet pT . Notably, these dedicated
LLP jet triggers enable increased efficiency for relatively low-pT events that are inaccessible
with purely pT -based triggers. The HCAL-based LLP jet triggers increase the acceptance at
L1 for signals with mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, and cτS = 3 m by up to a factor of 4 compared to standard L1 HT triggers. These paths provide added efficiency for low-pT and low-HT
LLP events, complementing the displaced-jet HLT paths seeded by L1 HT triggers discussed in
Section 6.2.3.
Prior to the implementation of a dedicated L1T HCAL-based LLP trigger, standard L1T HT
or jet triggers were used to seed the displaced-jet paths at the HLT. Before 2023 data taking,
the lowest threshold for an unprescaled HT L1T was 360 GeV, and this trigger reaches 80%
efficiency at an offline HT of 400 GeV. This L1T was used to seed the tracker-based displacedjet HLT paths (Section 6.2.3) in Run 2 and Run 3 and thus is referenced for comparison. On
the other hand, the lowest unprescaled HCAL-based L1T LLP jet path requires HT > 200 GeV,

36

L1T efficiency of LLP-flagged jets

418.5 pb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)
1

CMS

0.8

0.6

Timing shift = -4 ns
Timing shift = -2 ns
Timing shift = 0 ns
Timing shift = 2 ns
Timing shift = 4 ns
Timing shift = 6 ns
Timing shift = 8 ns
Timing shift = 10 ns

|η| ≤ 1.35
0.4

0.2

Jet p

106

CMS

Internal

0
0

s = 13.6 TeV

105

50

100

150

Events / Bin

Events / Bin

Event HT
v3.8 NoSel --

200

6

10

CMS

Internal

TeV
250 s = 13.6300

No cuts

105

mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m

T

v3.8 PerJet_LLPmatched --

350

400

L1 jet E [GeV]
T

No cuts

mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m

10
Figure
22: The L1T efficiency of the LLP jet trigger in 2023 HCAL timing-scan data as a function
10
of L1 jet ET . The results are inclusive in η for the HCAL
barrel, corresponding to |η | < 1.35. The
10
fraction of LLP-flagged L1 jets is compared to all L1 jets from a data set of events enriched in jets
10
or p10miss
T . No explicit selection criterion is applied on the jet ET , though the implicit requirement
for a jet to have at least two cells with ET > 4 GeV10 shapes the resulting jet trigger efficiency
10
curve.
While the trigger configuration is based on the presence of both delayed and displaced
200
400
800
1000
1200
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Jet p [GeV]
[GeV]
towers, the
timing
scan600demonstrates
theH ability
of the
trigger
to select
delayed
jets only.
No cuts

4

No cuts

mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m

mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m

4

3

3

2

2

1
0.9

CMS Simulation

T

(13.6 TeV)
L1T efficiency

L1T efficiency

T

H → SS → 4b

0.8
0.7

1
0.9

0.7
0.6

0.5

0.5

mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m

0.3

mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m

0.2
0.1
0
0

(13.6 TeV)

H → SS → 4b

0.8

0.6

0.4

CMS Simulation

0.4

mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m

0.3

mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m

0.2
0.1

200

400

600

800

1000

1200
HT [GeV]

0
0

50

100

150

200

250
300
Jet p [GeV]
T

Figure 23: The L1T efficiency of the HCAL-based LLP jet triggers, as a function of event HT
(left) and jet pT (right), for H → SS → bbbb events with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and
cτS = 0.5 m (light blue circles) and mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, and cτS = 3 m (purple
triangles), for 2023 conditions. The trigger efficiency is evaluated for LLPs decaying in HB
depths 3 or 4, corresponding to 214.2 < R < 295 cm and |η | < 1.26. These LLPs are also
required to be matched to an offline jet with pT > 40 GeV in HB.
and Fig. 23 (left) demonstrates that this trigger reaches an efficiency of 80% at an offline HT
of 300 GeV (for the mH = 125 GeV signal point). In Run 3, the lowest pT threshold for an
unprescaled single jet L1T is 180 GeV, and this trigger reaches 80% efficiency at an offline jet

6.3

37

Calorimeter-based algorithms

Table 5: The L1T minimum thresholds for HT and jet pT , comparing the thresholds of the standard trigger to those of the HCAL-based LLP jet trigger, for unprescaled paths that are used to
seed LLP HLTs. The dedicated LLP L1Ts enable significantly lower energy requirements.
Trigger object

Standard L1T threshold [GeV]

HCAL-based LLP jet L1T threshold [GeV]

Jet: Decay R of the matched LLP
Jet pT
180
60
No cuts
6
CMS
Internal
HT
360
200
mH = 350 GeV,
10
s = 13.6 m
TeV = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m
S
105
cuts demonstrates that the HCAL-based L1T LLP triggers
pT of 200 GeV. By contrast,
Fig. 23No(right)
mH = 125 GeV,
achieve an efficiency of10480% at an offline jet pT of only 90 GeV. As illustrated in Table 5, the
mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m
Events / Bin

v3.8 PerJet_LLPmatched --

dedicated HCAL-based delayed- and displaced-jet L1Ts implemented for Run 3 thus provide
10
access to significantly lower
energy final states than those accepted by standard jet or HT -based
triggers, broadening the kinematic phase space accessed by the CMS trigger program.
3

102

L1T efficiency

Figure 24 demonstrates the efficiency
of the HCAL-based LLP jet trigger as a function of the
p
10
2
LLP decay radial position R = ∆x + ∆y2 . The LLP is required to decay within |η | < 1.26
1
and be matched to an offline
jet with pT > 100 GeV. The L1T has an efficiency of more than
90% for LLP decays within
HCAL
depths
3 and 4150(214.2 200
< R < 295
cm), 300
the region targeted by
0
50
100
250
LLP decay R [cm]
the depth criteria in the trigger to identify displaced LLP jets.
(13.6 TeV)

1
0.9
0.8

CMS Simulation
H → SS → 4b

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

mH = 350 GeV,
mS = 80 GeV, cτ = 0.5 m
mH = 125 GeV,
mS = 50 GeV, cτ = 3 m

0.2
0.1
0
0

50

100

150

200

250
300
LLP decay R [cm]

Figure 24: The L1T efficiency of the HCAL-based LLP jet triggers as a function of LLP decay
radial position R for H → SS → bbbb events with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and cτS =
0.5 m (light blue circles) and mH = 125 GeV, mS = 50 GeV, and cτS = 3 m (purple triangles), for
2023 conditions. The trigger efficiency is evaluated for LLPs within |η | < 1.26 where either the
LLP or its decay products are matched to an offline jet in HB with pT > 100 GeV.
In general, the high-mass signal model reaches a higher efficiency at L1, as heavier LLPs are
more likely to produce jets that pass the stringent calorimeter energy deposit requirements
(multiple cells with over 5 GeV energy deposited in an individual depth) for the depth-based
trigger. Triggering on low-mass signals is more difficult since they tend to have lower HT and
therefore are less likely to satisfy energy-based selections. The high-mass signal also reaches
higher L1T efficiencies in jet pT and event HT because of the decay kinematic behavior. In this
signal, the LLP is more boosted, leading to more collimated decay products. This is beneficial
as the trigger requires multiple nearby depth-flagged trigger towers. The LLP proper decay
length primarily impacts the signal acceptance rather than the efficiency.
A suite of displaced- and delayed-jet HLT paths is seeded by the HCAL-based LLP L1 jet trig-

38
gers. The total rate of these HLT paths is about 35 Hz. Since the start of Run 3, a number of
these paths follow the HLT approach detailed in Sections 6.2.3 and 6.3.2. As the displacedand delayed-jet HLT paths are seeded with dedicated LLP jet L1 seeds, and not standard HT based L1Ts, low HT thresholds can be used at the HLT, while keeping the rates acceptable.
The lowest-threshold HCAL-based displaced-jet HLT path requires calo jet pT > 40 GeV and
HT > 170 GeV, which is 230 GeV lower than the minimum HT threshold used by similar standard paths. This path benefits from the unprescaled L1 double-jet seed, which has no HT requirement at L1.
In 2024, an additional HLT path was added to target highly displaced jets arising from LLPs
decaying hadronically inside the calorimeters, complementing the depth-based L1 seed. This
HLT path, referred to as the “CalRatio” trigger, selects jets that have a large neutral hadron energy fraction (NHEF). The composition of these objects may not actually be enriched in neutral
hadrons. Instead, this selection is associated with a large fraction of energy deposited in the
HCAL with minimal ECAL and tracker activity. In other words, this trigger selects for a high ratio of calorimeter energies, comparing the HCAL to the ECAL—a defining feature of displaced
jets produced inside the hadronic calorimeter. This trigger selects events with HT > 200 GeV
containing at least one calo jet with pT > 60 GeV, |η | < 1.5, and hadronic energy fraction > 0.7;
since calo jets do not contain tracking information, neutral and charged contributions cannot
be distinguished. To suppress background and limit the rate, the trigger additionally requires
at least one PF jet with the same kinematic requirements and NHEF > 0.7. The HLT efficiency
of the path, together with characteristic distributions of this variable in data, signal, and background, is shown in Fig. 25 as a function of the NHEF of the highest pT (leading) PF jet. The
efficiency plateaus at around 90% for NHEF > 0.8; it does not reach 100% largely because the
additional offline kinematic selections in the trigger (e.g., HT and jet pT ), which are equivalent
to their online quantities, are below their respective efficiency plateaus.
6.3.2

Delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing

Dedicated triggers targeting delayed-jet signatures were introduced at the HLT during Run 3
to improve the performance for nonprompt jets [14]. These triggers are highly efficient for
LLPs that decay into jets within the tracker or the ECAL volume, as shown in Fig. 26. Many
extensions of the SM predict the existence of LLPs that decay into jet final states, including
GMSB models [101] and hidden valley models [120]. The delayed-jet triggers utilize the timing
capabilities of the ECAL [121] to search for such signatures.
These HLT paths are seeded by L1Ts that require either HT > 350 GeV or a τ h candidate with
pT > 120 GeV. At the HLT, jet timing requirements are placed on single or double inclusive
and trackless calo jets. A trackless jet is defined as a calo jet with at most two associated
prompt tracks, while the inclusive jets do not have this additional requirement. Single (double) delayed-jet triggers refer to a requirement of at least one (two) delayed jets satisfying the
trigger conditions. The triggers at the HLT include a variety of timing thresholds to balance the
trigger rates against the signal efficiency. For example, the timing thresholds for the single jet
triggers at the HLT are >1 ns, and the timing resolution is around 0.4 ns. The delayed-jet triggers are designed to be model-independent and more efficient for lower-HT final states than
the triggers used in the Run 2 analysis, which targeted final states with pmiss
> 300 GeV [14].
T
Figure 27 shows the improvement in the trigger efficiency in Run 3 with the dedicated delayedjet triggers, compared to Run 2, where a standard trigger that requires HT > 1050 GeV was
available. The improvement is particularly noticeable at low HT , for a signal model where
very heavy BSM Higgs bosons decay into generic LLPs (X) and subsequently into 4 b jets,
H → XX → bbbb, the diagram for which is shown in Fig. 4. Some trigger inefficiencies are

39

Calorimeter-based algorithms

123 fb-1 (2024) (13.6 TeV)

1
0.9
0.8

123 fb-1 (2024) (13.6 TeV)
Normalized entries / 0.04

HLT efficiency

6.3

CMS
Data

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

CMS
Data
W → lν +jets
H → SS → 4b (350 GeV, 80 GeV, 0.5 m)
H → SS → 4b (125 GeV, 50 GeV, 3 m)

1

10−1

10−2

0.3
0.2
−3

10

0.1
0
0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1

0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

Leading jet neutral hadron energy fraction

1

Leading jet neutral hadron energy fraction

y [cm]

Figure 25: The HLT efficiency of the CalRatio trigger as a function of the leading PF jet NHEF
in 2024 data, measured with respect to a logical OR of the HCAL-based LLP L1 jet triggers
(left). Distribution of the leading PF jet NHEF (right) in 2024 data (black circles), W → ℓ ν background simulation for 2024 conditions (red squares), and H → SS → bbbb signal simulation
for 2023 conditions (blue and purple triangles). Events are required to have HT > 200 GeV and
the leading jet is required to have pT > 60 GeV and |η | < 1.5; these requirements are equivalent to the respective HLT jet object selections. The signal distributions additionally require the
leading jet to be matched to an LLP decaying anywhere inside the barrel calorimeter volume
(129 < R < 295 cm). The clear separation between the displaced signal and the prompt background in the right plot motivates the development of the CalRatio trigger.

-150

Jet
-100

-50

X
0

X
50

Tracker

100

ECAL

150

HCAL
-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

x [cm]

Figure 26: Diagram of a typical delayed-jet signal event.
introduced because HT is calculated offline using jets with pT > 40 GeV and differs from the
HT calculated at the HLT. The trackless delayed-jet trigger requires at most two prompt tracks
associated with the delayed jet. This trigger has lower efficiency compared to the inclusive one
(red squares) as a result of this additional requirement. However, the trackless trigger adds
to the signal acceptance for certain signal parameter space regions, and its lower rate enables

40
reducing the timing thresholds compared to the inclusive trigger. The delayed-jet trigger suite
is a combination of inclusive triggers and trackless triggers with lower timing thresholds, both
of which contribute to the overall signal acceptance.

L1T+HLT efficiency

CMS Simulation
1.4

(13.6 TeV)

H → XX → 4b (m = 1000 GeV, mX = 450 GeV, cτ = 10 m)
H

Inclusive delayed jet trigger with HT > 430 GeV and jet timing > 1 ns

1.2
1

Trackless delayed jet trigger with HT > 430 GeV and jet timing > 1 ns
HT > 1050 GeV trigger

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

HT [GeV]

(13.6 TeV)

1.2
CMS Simulation
1

H → XX → 4b (mH = 1000 GeV, mX = 450 GeV, cτ = 10 m)

0.8
0.6
HT-seeded inclusive delayed jet trigger

0.4

HT-seeded delayed trackless jet trigger

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

Figure 27: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the inclusive and trackless delayed-jet triggers introduced in Run 3 in red squares (blue triangles), for 2022 conditions, and the HT trigger (black
circles), which was the most appropriate path available in Run 2, for a H → XX → 4b signal
with mH = 1000 GeV, mX = 450 GeV, and cτ = 10 m. The addition of these delayed-jet triggers
results in a significant improvement in the efficiency of the signal for 430 < HT < 1050 GeV.
These plots include events with jets with pT > 40 GeV, number of ECAL cells > 5, barrel region
with |η | < 1.48, and jet timing > 1 ns.
(13.6 TeV)

1.2
CMS Simulation
1

H → XX → 4τ (mH = 1000 GeV, mX = 450 GeV, cτ = 10 m)

0.8
0.6
HT-seeded inclusive delayed jet trigger

0.4

HT-seeded delayed trackless jet trigger

Tau-seeded inclusive delayed jet trigger

0.2
0
0

Tau-seeded delayed trackless jet trigger

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

HT [GeV]

Tau-seeded inclusive delayed jet trigger

0.2
0
0

Tau-seeded delayed trackless jet trigger

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

HT [GeV]

Figure 28: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the delayed-jet triggers for signal models with H →
XX → 4b (left) and H → XX → 4τ (right), with mH = 1000 GeV, mX = 450 GeV and cτ =
10 m, for 2022 conditions. The improvement from the tau triggers (blue and green triangles) is
evident in the HT < 430 GeV region compared to the HT -seeded triggers (black circles and red
squares). These plots include events with jets with pT > 40 GeV, number of ECAL cells > 5,
barrel region with |η | < 1.48, and jet timing > 2 ns.
The inclusion of the tau candidate seed in the L1T improves the analysis sensitivity to low-HT
signal models, targeting LLPs that decay into tau leptons in addition to jets. Figure 28 demonstrates the improvement in signal efficiency because of the L1 tau seed addition, particularly
for the low-HT final states for H → XX → 4b and H → XX → 4τ decays. The decrease in

6.3

41

Calorimeter-based algorithms

1.2

CMS

27.2 fb-1 (2023) + 3.1 fb-1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

HLT selection: HT > 430 GeV, ≥ 1 jet with p > 40 GeV and t > 2 ns
T

1
0.8
0.6
2023

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

efficiency at large HT values is attributed to the large discrepancy between online and offline
HT for LLP signals with a large cτ of 10 m.
1.2

CMS

27.2 fb-1 (2023) + 3.1 fb-1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

HLT selection: L1Tau, ≥ 1 jet with p > 40 GeV and t > 3.5 ns
T

1
0.8
0.6
2023
0.4

0.4
2022

2022
0.2

0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Jet timing [ns]

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Jet timing [ns]

Figure 29: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the delayed-jet triggers as a function of jet timing for 2022
(red triangles) and 2023 (black circles) data-taking periods for the HT -seeded trigger (left) and
the τ-seeded trigger (right). A clear rise in efficiency is evident around the threshold values.
The plots include events that pass the pmiss
> 200 GeV trigger and have at least one barrel
T
jet with pT > 50 GeV, number of ECAL cells > 8, and ECAL energy > 25 GeV. The HT is
calculated using the scalar sum of jets with offline pT > 40 GeV, and this is different from the
HT calculation used at the HLT level, contributing to the trigger inefficiencies. The maximum
jet time accepted by the trigger is 12.5 ns.
The total trigger rate of the ECAL-based delayed-jet triggers at the HLT is 37 Hz in standard
data taking. Figure 29 shows the trigger performance in Run 3 data collected in 2022 and 2023
as a function of jet timing. A clear rise in efficiency is evident at the trigger timing threshold.
To increase the analysis sensitivity, triggers with lower timing thresholds are introduced in the
parked data with an upper bound on timing to ensure minimal overlap with the triggers in
standard data taking [45]. These triggers take advantage of the higher rate allocation for the
parked data-taking stream and have a lower timing threshold, thus providing higher signal
acceptance. The parking triggers have a signal acceptance that is more than 30% higher than
their counterparts in the standard data stream. The total trigger rate for these triggers in the
parked data-taking stream is 77 Hz.
6.3.3

Delayed-diphoton triggers

Electrons and photons from the decay of an LLP whose mean path length is of the order of the
CMS tracker dimensions will produce a distinct signature in the ECAL. The peak signal time of
such an electromagnetic signature will be delayed compared to an electron or photon created
from the proton collision vertex at the center of the detector. This is conceptually illustrated
in Fig. 30. The time delay at the seed crystal of the ECAL supercluster, called e/γ seed time,
is chosen as a representative value of the time delay of the delayed ECAL signature. For a
displaced vertex in the inner pixel tracker region, the expected delay in the peak ECAL electromagnetic signature is of the order of nanoseconds, which is significantly larger than the ECAL
timing resolution of <0.2 ns for energies >10 GeV in the barrel, as mentioned in Section 2.
Figure 31 shows the expected ECAL time delay for simulated LLP signals with different cτ
values and for Z → ee simulation. An ECAL supercluster reconstructed with the online reconstruction algorithm is matched by angle to a generator-level electron. The seed time distribution for electrons from the Z boson decay shows the spread in the distribution of the prompt

42
e/γ objects [36]. The LLP decay appears in the ECAL O(ns) later than the prompt Z → ee
simulation. The ECAL timing measurement is affected by radiation damage to the ECAL crystals, which reduces the efficiency to trigger on delayed electrons and photons. The radiation
damage is larger in the ECAL endcap, which results in worse timing resolution than the barrel and thereby smaller apparent differences in the seed time distribution between LLP signals
with different cτ values.

ECAL crystals
prompt

e

±

displaced

x
z

𝛘±

(13.6 TeV)

1
CMS Simulation
0 ±

χ →χ l ν
±

−1

10

Z → ee
cτ = 3 cm
cτ = 30 cm
cτ = 3 m

Events / 0.2 ns

Events / 0.2 ns

Figure 30: Diagram of a prompt (orange dotted line) and displaced (red solid line) electron,
which comes from the decay of a chargino, reaching the ECAL in the x-z plane. The time
measurement is shifted so that all prompt electron signals register the same time, no matter
where they are located in the ECAL. An electron produced at a displaced vertex thus arrives
delayed compared to a prompt particle.
(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation
0 ±

χ →χ l ν
±

−1

10

Z → ee
cτ = 3 cm
cτ = 30 cm
cτ = 3 m

10−2
10−3

|η| < 1.4

−3 −2 −1

1.6 < |η| < 2.1
−2

10

1 2 3 4 5
−1
0
1
2
3
e/γ seed time [ns]
e/γ seed time [ns]
Figure 31: The ECAL time delay of the e/γ L1 seeds in the barrel (left) and endcap (right). The
distributions are shown for Z → ee simulation (filled blue circles) and χ0 cτ values of 3 cm
(open red squares), 30 cm (open purple triangles) and 3 m (open yellow crosses), assuming the
singlet-triplet Higgs dark portal model (χ± → χ0 ℓ ν, where the χ± has a mass of 220 GeV and
the χ0 has a mass of 200 GeV), for 2023 conditions. The distributions are normalized to unity.
0

A new trigger was introduced in Run 3 to improve the CMS sensitivity to delayed electrons and
photons arising in the singlet-triplet Higgs portal dark matter model discussed in Ref. [92]. This
trigger uses single and double e/γ seeds at the L1T, and it selects both delayed electrons and
photons with the same HLT path by applying requirements only to ECAL superclusters. No
electron track requirement is applied to create specific trigger paths for electrons because the
typical electron track reconstruction algorithm is not efficient for displaced electrons. Although

6.3

43

Calorimeter-based algorithms

this trigger is highly efficient for both delayed electrons and photons, we call it “the delayeddiphoton trigger” in what follows, for simplicity.

7

CMS

PU
e/γ seed time > 1 ns

70
60

6
50
5
40
4
3

10

HLT rate [Hz]

8

PU

HLT rate [Hz]

4.2 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

Fill 9573
Fill 9574
Fill 9575
Fill 9579

8
6
4

30
20

2

10
1
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
Integrated luminosity [fb-1]

00

2

0.677 fb 1 (2024) (13.6 TeV)

10

20

30

40

50

60

70
PU

Figure 32: The HLT rate (blue points) of the delayed-diphoton trigger for a few representative
runs in the first data collected in 2023, corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 4.2 fb−1 ,
compared with the PU during the same data-taking period (red points), as a function of integrated luminosity (left). The rate decreases nonlinearly during a single fill as a result of the
increasing crystal opacity. It recovers by the start of the next fill with <1% reduction in rate
between the fills. The rate generally increased throughout the year because of periodic online
calibrations to mitigate the loss in trigger efficiency, which is a result of the ECAL crystal radiation damage. The delayed-diphoton trigger rate is shown as a function of PU for selected fills
in 2024 data, at an instantaneous luminosity of approximately 1.8 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 (right). The
trigger rate displays a linear dependency on PU.
The delayed-diphoton trigger requires at least two ECAL superclusters with |η | < 2.1 and ET >
22 (12) GeV for the leading (subleading) supercluster, where the “subleading” supercluster has
the second-highest ET . This asymmetric minimum energy threshold is reduced to a symmetric
ET > 10 GeV threshold on both superclusters if the event has PF HT > 300 GeV. The time
delay for the crystal with the largest energy is required to be larger than 1 ns for both ECAL
superclusters.
Figure 32 (left) shows the dependence of the delayed-diphoton trigger rate on integrated luminosity and PU in 2024. Within a fill, even while the instantaneous luminosity is kept constant,
the rate decreases nonlinearly as a result of the increasing ECAL crystal opacity, which reduces
the light yield and shifts the energy spectrum to smaller values and the timing distribution
towards negative values. Interfill energy calibrations restore efficiency, as shown at integrated
luminosities of 0.7 and 1.4 fb−1 , indicating minimal permanent damage on short timescales.
Over extended running periods, however, radiation damage can significantly degrade sensitivity, necessitating periodic online timing calibrations to correct negative shifts. These calibration
updates maintain high efficiency for LLP signals with a 1 ± 0.2 ns delay, though the calibration
is intentionally overestimated by 0.2 ns to account for radiation effects between long shutdowns
of the LHC. At an integrated luminosity of 2.7 fb−1 , this produces a temporary “spike” in rate,
which diminishes over subsequent fills as a result of the nonlinear timing dependence, leaving
the average rate higher than before. Additionally, progressive timing resolution degradation

44

L1T + HLT efficiency

10.8 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

1
0.9 CMS
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
e/ γ ET > 12 GeV,
0.4
2
seed time > 1 ns,
0.3
|η| < 2.1
0.2
0.1
0
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
seed time (e ) [ns]
2

Figure 33: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the delayed-diphoton trigger as a function of the subleading probe electron (e 2 ) supercluster seed time, measured with data collected in 2023. At
the HLT, the subleading e/γ supercluster (e/γ 2 ) is required to have ET > 12 GeV, |η | < 2.1,
and a seed time >1 ns. The trigger reaches maximum efficiency above 1 ns.
throughout the year necessitates a higher trigger rate. In 2024, the rate scales linearly with PU,
as seen in Fig. 32 (right). The spread in rate for a single PU value is caused by the reduction in
rate during the period of constant instantaneous luminosity, as described above.
The total rate of these HLT paths is about 15 Hz. As explained at the beginning of Section 6, this
rate is calculated from data taken on October 4, 2024, soon after an energy calibration update

1
0.9 CMS
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
e/ γ ET > 12 GeV
0.4
2
seed time > 1 ns,
0.3
|η| < 2.1
0.2
0.1
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
p (e ) [GeV]
T

2

L1T + HLT efficiency

L1T + HLT efficiency

10.8 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

10.8 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

CMS
e/ γ ET > 12 GeV
2

seed time > 1 ns,
|η| < 2.1

−2

−1

0

1

2
η (e )
2

Figure 34: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the delayed-diphoton trigger as a function of subleading
probe electron (e 2 ) pT (left) and η (right), measured with data collected in 2023. At the HLT, the
subleading e/γ supercluster (e/γ 2 ) is required to have ET > 12 GeV, |η | < 2.1, and a seed time
>1 ns. The efficiency rises sharply for pT > 12 GeV and plateaus for pT > 35 GeV. The slow
rise in between is from additional L1 HT requirements. The trigger is efficient in the region
|η | < 2.1.

6.3

45

Calorimeter-based algorithms

was applied. As a result, this rate is about a factor of 3 larger than the rates reported in Fig. 32.
Data collected in the later part of 2023 and corresponding to an integrated luminosity of
10.8 fb−1 are used to measure the trigger efficiency of the delayed-diphoton HLT path, using
the “tag-and-probe” method with Z → ee decays [122]. The limited resolution of the online
calibration results in a set of Z boson decays with a prompt signature that can appear delayed
by more than 1 ns, which is large enough to facilitate the trigger efficiency measurement. The
tag electron is required to have pT > 20 GeV, |η | < 2.1, cluster seed time >1 ns, and to pass the
tight identification [28]. Probe electrons are only considered if the tag-and-probe electron pair
has two electrons of opposite charges and the dielectron invariant mass is within a window of
84 < mee < 96 GeV, consistent with the mass of the Z boson. The probe electron is required to
have pT > 4 GeV and |η | < 2.5. The trigger efficiency is defined as the ratio of the probe electrons that pass the HLT path to all the probe electrons that pass the selection criteria. Figure 33
shows the trigger efficiency as a function of the subleading probe electron seed time, which
sharply rises at a seed time of 1 ns and plateaus thereafter. Figure 34 shows the efficiency as a
function of the subleading probe electron pT and η, for events with a seed time >1 ns.
6.3.4

Displaced-photon + HT triggers

A trigger designed to collect events containing a displaced photon in addition to hadronic
activity was originally deployed online in 2017, during Run 2. This displaced-photon + HT
trigger was designed for the search for delayed photons [13], which targets the decays of longlived neutralinos into displaced and delayed photons in a GMSB model [91]. The delayed
photon signature is shown in Fig. 35. At the HLT, this trigger requires a photon with pT >
60 GeV; a set of loose, calorimeter-based identification requirements; loose isolation; and a loose
set of requirements on the calorimeter shower shape, such that the shower is compatible with a
displaced and delayed photon. The ECAL hit pattern from displaced photons is more elliptical
in the η-ϕ plane than that of prompt photons, and so the length Smajor (Sminor ) of the major
(minor) axis of the shower is required to be less than 1.5 (0.4). In addition, in Run 3, the trigger
requires PF HT > 350 GeV, where HT is the scalar sum of pT for all jets satisfying pT > 30 GeV
and |η | < 2.5, to keep the rate around 12 Hz at the HLT. The L1 seeds of the HLT path require
at least one e/γ object, tau lepton, or jet.
y

y
ECAL

γ

sh
ow
er

γ sh
ower

ECAL

ϕ

RecHit
Smajor
Sminor

γ

γ
0

χ̃

x

x

η

Figure 35: Diagrams of a promptly decaying photon in the x-y plane showering in the ECAL
(left), a delayed photon produced from a long-lived neutralino χe0 in the x-y plane showering
later in the ECAL (middle), and an elliptical shower in the η-ϕ plane produced from a delayed
photon (right). The lengths of the major (Smajor ) and minor (Sminor ) axes of the shower and the
reconstructed hits (RecHits) that compose the shower are labeled.
The efficiency of the displaced-photon + HT trigger is shown in Fig. 36 as a function of offline

46

1

CMS

41.5 fb -1 (2017) (13 TeV)

0.8
0.6
0.4

| η | < 1.44
Λ = 100 TeV, cτ = 10 cm

0.2
0

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

photon pT (left) and the event HT (right). Events in 2017 data (Run 2) and a GMSB signal
benchmark with Λ = 100 TeV and cτ = 10 or 1000 cm for 2017 conditions are selected that
pass a trigger requiring isolated muons with pT > 27 GeV and at least one offline photon with
|η | < 1.44 and passing the displaced-photon identification criteria as described in Ref. [13].
Only the leading photon satisfying these requirements is considered in the trigger efficiency
measurements. These plots indicate that the trigger is fully efficient for photon pT > 70 GeV
and HT > 400 GeV. In 2017, the HLT path required HT > 350 GeV for jets satisfying pT >
15 GeV and |η | < 3. The efficiency of the standard-photon identification and the displacedphoton identification in the displaced-photon+ HT trigger is over 95%. For a typical high-PU
run in 2017, the displaced-photon identification requirements reduced the trigger rate by 20%.

Λ = 100 TeV, cτ = 1000 cm
Data

30

100

200

1000

pTγ [GeV]

1

CMS

41.5 fb -1 (2017) (13 TeV)

0.8
0.6
0.4

|η | < 1.44
Λ = 100 TeV, cτ = 10 cm

0.2
0
100

Λ = 100 TeV, cτ = 1000 cm
Data

200 300

1000

2000

HT [GeV]

Figure 36: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the displaced-photon + HT trigger as a function of photon
pT (left) and event HT (right), for 2017 data (black circles) and GMSB signals with Λ = 100 TeV
and cτ = 10 cm (blue triangles) or cτ = 1000 cm (red squares).
In 2022, the rate of this trigger increased more than initially expected as a result of the higher
PU. The HLT rate as a function of PU was also nonlinear and thus difficult to maintain. The
trigger was modified for 2023 data taking by increasing the minimum pT requirement on the
jets included in the PF HT calculation at the HLT. After raising the minimum jet pT threshold
from 15 to 30 GeV, the total HLT rate was reduced to 12 Hz (about 4 Hz pure), and the behavior
with respect to PU was again linear. Figure 37 shows the rate of this trigger in 2022 and 2023
data as a function of PU.

6.4

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

This section describes trigger algorithms designed to select LLP decays in the muon system.
These include displaced-dimuon triggers (Section 6.4.1), double displaced L3 muon triggers
(Section 6.4.2), displaced muon + photon triggers (Section 6.4.3), dimuon scouting triggers (Section 6.4.4), and MDS triggers with the CSCs (Section 6.4.5) and with the DTs (Section 6.4.6).
6.4.1

Displaced single-muon and dimuon triggers

An LLP produced in a hard interaction of the colliding protons can traverse a considerable
distance in the detector before decaying into muons. When muons are produced well within
the silicon tracker, they can be reconstructed by both the tracker and the muon system. However, if the muons are produced with larger displacements, they can only be reconstructed by
the muon system. A pair of reconstructed muon tracks is fitted to a common secondary vertex forming a “displaced dimuon”. All reconstructed dimuon events are classified into two

47

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

HLT rate [Hz]

50

10.6 fb 1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

40

50

HLT rate [Hz]

6.4

CMS

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

00

3.1 fb 1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

10

20

30

40

50

60

70
PU

00

10

20

30

40

50

60

70
PU

Figure 37: Total rate of the displaced-photon + HT HLT path for a few representative runs in
2022 data (left), at an instantaneous luminosity of approximately 1.8 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 , and 2023
data (right), at an instantaneous luminosity of approximately 2.0 × 1034 cm−2 s−1 , as a function
of PU. The rate vs PU behavior was nonlinear in 2022, and the jet pT was increased to restore a
linear dependence for 2023 data taking.
mutually exclusive categories: (1) where both muons are global muons and are reconstructed
using both the tracker and the muon system (TMS-TMS category), or (2) where both muons are
standalone muons (STA-STA category). (The TMS-STA category is not considered because it
provides only a small fraction of events for the considered signals.) Owing to the excellent resolution of the tracker, the position and momentum resolution of global and tracker muons are
far superior to that of their standalone muon counterparts. This enhanced position resolution
leads to an improvement in the resolution of the TMS-TMS dimuon vertex by a factor of 100 to
1000 for simulated HAHM events [90], depending on the lifetime of the LLP and the masses of
the exotic Higgs boson and the LLP. On the other hand, the STA-STA category provides sensitivity to LLPs that decay outside the tracker volume. Figure 38 shows an event display from
Run 3 data that illustrates the displaced dimuon signature.
Since Run 2, a set of dedicated dimuon triggers has existed that relies on muons reconstructed
only in the muon system (the STA-STA category) using algorithms that are similar to those used
in the standalone offline muon reconstruction. These triggers were deployed in 2016 and 2018
and included a beam-axis constraint in the muon track fits at the L1T, but not at the HLT. This
beam-axis requirement caused a large reduction in displaced-muon reconstruction efficiency
for large LLP lifetimes. Each HLT muon was required to be within the region |η | < 2.0 and to
have pT > 28 (23) GeV for 2016 (2018) data taking. The CMS Collaboration performed a Run 2
search for LLPs decaying to a pair of muons that used these triggers [123]. During Run 3, these
triggers (labeled “Run 2 (2018)”) are also used, maintaining the pT threshold of 23 GeV from
2018.
To enhance the signal efficiency, a novel set of displaced-dimuon triggers, both at L1 and the
HLT, was introduced at the beginning of Run 3. These improvements made an early search [12]
possible, and its results are competitive with those of Run 2, using only 2022 Run 3 data with
less than half of the Run 2 integrated luminosity.

48

Figure 38: A Run 3 data event containing a candidate LLP decay into a pair of muons away
from the IP, reconstructed in the CMS detector. The red lines correspond to the two muons,
which are detected only in the muon system. The muon tracks are used to calculate a dimuon
vertex, indicated by the white circle, where the LLP is hypothesized to have decayed.
At L1, two additional sets of triggers were introduced. One set comprises traditional beam
axis-constrained double-muon triggers with either no or a very low (4.5 GeV) minimum muonpT threshold. The triggers in this set have the following requirements: the L1 muon candidates
have opposite
√ charges; segments in at least three different muon stations; an angular separation
∆Rµµ = (∆ηµµ )2 + (∆ϕµµ )2 that does not exceed a maximum threshold that varies between
1.2 and 1.4; and |η | < 1.5. The other set takes advantage of a new track-finding procedure for
the barrel section of the L1 muon trigger in the barrel muon track finder (BMTF) algorithm.
This novel technique enables the reconstruction of L1 muon candidates and the determination
of their pT without using a beam-axis constraint [24]. These triggers require pT > 15 and 7 GeV
for the leading and subleading L1 muon, respectively. The minimum pT thresholds are lowered
to 6 and 4 GeV when d0 > 25 cm for both L1 muons.
In the barrel/endcap overlap and the endcap sections of the L1 muon trigger, the determination
of muon pT without a beam-axis constraint was implemented for 2024 data taking, extending
the coverage of L1 displaced-muon triggers to the full η range of CMS.
In the overlap section, to allow for the beam axis-unconstrained pT measurement, the overlap
muon track finder (OMTF) algorithm first extrapolates the direction of a reference hit, selected
from hits in the two innermost muon stations, to other muon stations. Then, the differences
between ϕ values of hits in these other stations and extrapolated ϕ values from the reference
hit are used by the OMTF algorithm [124] to reconstruct the muons and determine both beam
axis-constrained and beam axis-unconstrained pT .
In the endcap section, the endcap muon track finder (EMTF) algorithm uses a neural network
(NN) to determine the beam axis-unconstrained muon pT and d0 , using 29 features extracted
from the muon track. In parallel to the NN, the original EMTF algorithm, based on a boosted

6.4

49

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

1.4

(13.6 TeV)

L1T efficiency

L1T efficiency

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation L1T pT > 10 GeV, gen pT > 15 GeV
|ηgen| < 0.83
st2

1.2

Beam axis-constrained
1

Beam axis-unconstrained

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

80

100

Beam axis-unconstrained

0
0

120

T

Beam axis-constrained

0.6

60

gen
st2

1

0.6

40

T

0.83 < |η | < 1.24

0.8

20

L1T p > 10 GeV, gen p > 15 GeV

1.2

0.8

0
0

CMS Simulation

1.4

20

40

60

Gen.-level muon track d0 [cm]

80

100

120

Gen.-level muon track d0 [cm]

L1T efficiency

(13.6 TeV)
1.4

CMS Simulation

L1T p > 10 GeV, gen p > 15 GeV

1.24 < |η | < 1.6
1.2
1

T

1.6 < |η | < 2.0

gen
st2

gen

T

st2

Beam axis-constrained

Beam axis-constrained

Beam axis-unconstrained

Beam axis-unconstrained

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Gen.-level muon track d0 [cm]

Figure 39: The BMTF (upper left), OMTF (upper right), and EMTF (lower) L1T efficiencies
for beam axis-constrained (open circles, squares, and triangles) and beam axis-unconstrained
(filled circles, squares, and triangles) pT assignment algorithms for L1T pT > 10 GeV with respect to generator-level muon track d0 , obtained using a sample which produces LLPs that
decay to dimuons. The L1T algorithms and data-taking conditions correspond to 2024. A selection on the generator-level muon track pT > 15 GeV is applied to show the performance
at the efficiency plateau. The generator-level muon tracks are extrapolated to the second
gen
muon station to determine the ηst2 values that are used in the plot. Both the new vertexunconstrained algorithm performance and the default beam axis-constrained algorithm performance are shown. In the EMTF plot, the different colors and symbols show different |η |
gen
gen
regions: 1.24 < ηst2 < 1.6 (blue squares), 1.6 < ηst2 < 2.0 (red triangles).
decision tree [125], is used to determine the beam axis-constrained pT .
Figure 39 shows the efficiency of the BMTF, OMTF, and EMTF algorithms for both beam axisconstrained and beam axis-unconstrained pT , using a simulated sample of LLPs that decay into
a pair of muons.
At the L1 global trigger, an additional displaced-dimuon trigger algorithm was introduced in
2024. This trigger uses the outputs of BMTF, OMTF, and EMTF and requires two high-quality
muons with beam axis-unconstrained pT > 6 GeV. It covers the range |η | < 2, thus extending
the η range of the displaced dimuon triggers used previously.
At the HLT, two new displaced-dimuon paths were introduced. The new triggers are characterized by minimum pT thresholds that depend on the muon d0 . These two triggers are similar

Run 3 (2022)
Run 2 (2018)

L1T+HLT efficiency

50
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

Run 2 (2018)
Run 3 (2022)
Run 3 (2022, L3)

H → ZDZD
mH = 125 GeV
mZ = 20 GeV
D

Run 3 (2022, L2)

5
4
3
2
1
0

10−2

10−1

1

10

102

103

104

cτ [cm]

Figure 40: The L1T+HLT efficiencies of the various displaced-dimuon triggers and their logical
OR as a function of cτ for the HAHM signal events with mH = 125 GeV and mZ D = 20 GeV,
for 2022 conditions. The efficiency is defined as the fraction of simulated events that satisfy
the detector acceptance and the requirements of the following sets of triggers: the Run 2 (2018)
triggers (dashed black); the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers (blue); the Run 3 (2022, L2) triggers (red);
and the logical OR of all these triggers (Run 3 (2022), solid black). The lower panel shows the
ratio of the overall Run 3 (2022) efficiency to the Run 2 (2018) efficiency. Figure adapted from
Ref. [12].
in that they both perform the L3 muon reconstruction, but the way the L3 muons are used in
the triggers is different. In the first path, the L3 muon is used to reject events, while in the
second path, the L3 muon is used to select events.
The first algorithm, labeled “Run 3 (2022, L2)”, attempts to reconstruct the muon candidates
at the L3 stage (similar to global muons), taking advantage of their superior tracker resolution
for determining muon d0 , instead of stopping the online reconstruction at the L2 stage (muon
system alone), as was done in the Run 2 trigger. If either of the two L2 muon candidates is
reconstructed as an L3 muon with d0 < 1 cm, the event is discarded, since such an L2 muon
candidate is likely to originate from the background processes. The resulting trigger operates
with minimum L2 muon pT thresholds of 10 GeV and significantly improves the signal efficiency while adding only ≈10 Hz to the HLT rate.

The second new HLT algorithm, labeled “Run 3 (2022, L3)”, relies entirely on the online L3
muon reconstruction, in contrast to the “Run 3 (2022, L2)” trigger. A minimum threshold on
the impact parameter of each muon, d0 > 0.01 cm, allows the minimum pT thresholds to be
low: 16 (10) GeV for the leading (subleading) L3 muon. The resulting trigger greatly improves
the signal efficiency at smaller cτ compared to the Run 3 (2022, L2) trigger, while adding only
10 Hz to the HLT rate.
An equivalent trigger to the Run 3 (2022, L3), labeled “Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks)”, is also included
for data taking. This trigger uses a newly developed L3 muon reconstruction algorithm that
closely resembles the algorithm used offline. The main improvements are the inclusion of the
displaced tracker muons and the optimization of the seeding stage of the muon trajectory building, which is made more efficient for displaced muons by removing the d0 requirement. The
new trigger, currently in the commissioning phase, has the same signal efficiency but with a
rate that is ≈15% less than that of the Run 3 (2022, L3) trigger.

6.4

51

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

The combined L1T+HLT efficiency of the various displaced-dimuon triggers and their logical
OR as a function of cτ is shown in Fig. 40 for simulated HAHM signal events, where the dark
Higgs boson (H D ) mixes with the SM Higgs boson (H) decays to a pair of long-lived dark
photons (Z D ), each with a mass mZ D = 20 GeV, as shown in Fig. 5. The addition of new triggers
at L1 and the HLT improves the efficiency for Z D with mZ D > 10 GeV and cτ ≳ 0.1 cm by a
factor of 2 to 4, depending on cτ and mass.
We use STA-STA dimuons that have a three-dimensional (3D) opening angle compatible with
a cosmic ray muon traversing CMS recorded with the Run 2 (2018) trigger to evaluate the
efficiency of the Run 3 (2022, L2) triggers. The efficiency as a function of min(d0 ) is shown in
Fig. 41 (left). It is greater than 95% for dimuons with min(d0 ) up to 350 cm in both 2022 and
2023. Figure 41 (right) shows the invariant mass distribution for TMS-TMS dimuons in events
recorded by the Run 2 (2018) triggers, and the subset of events also selected by the Run 3 (2022,
L2).
CMS
Events / 4 GeV

36.6 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

36.6 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

9

10

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 2 (2018))

TMS-TMS

108

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 3 (2022, L2))

107
106
105
104
103
102
10
1
0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200

mµµ [GeV]

Figure 41: The HLT efficiency (left), defined as the fraction of events recorded by the Run 2
(2018) triggers that also satisfy the requirements of the Run 3 (2022, L2) triggers, as a function of
offline-reconstructed min(d0 ) of the two muons forming STA-STA dimuons in events enriched
in cosmic ray muons. The black circles represent efficiencies during the 2022 data-taking period, and the red triangles represent the 2023 period. For displaced muons, the efficiency of the
online min(d0 ) requirement is larger than 95% in all data-taking periods. The invariant mass
distribution for TMS-TMS dimuons (right) in events recorded by the Run 2 (2018) triggers in
the combined 2022 and 2023 data set (black circles), and in the subset of events also selected
by the Run 3 (2022, L2) triggers (pink triangles), illustrating the prompt muon rejection of the
Run 3 (2022, L2) triggers.
An efficiency measurement is performed for the Run 3 (2022, L3) trigger based on J/ψ → µµ
events, recorded using jets and pmiss
triggers with 2022 and 2023 data. This data set corresponds
T
to an integrated luminosity of 64.3 fb−1 , which is ≈4% more than is used in other sections of
this paper that focus on 2022 and 2023 data, since in this case, only the subdetectors needed
for muon reconstruction are required to provide good-quality data. The efficiencies are defined as the subset of these events that also pass the Run 3 (2022, L3) path. The measurement
is compared with the efficiency in simulation, defined as the fraction of events that pass the
same trigger, obtained by combining various simulated samples of b hadrons that decay into
J/ψ → µµ. Figure 42 shows trigger efficiencies as a function of the minimum pT of the two
muons in the event, min( pT ); the maximum pT of the two muons, max( pT ); and the minimum
d0 of the two muons, min(d0 ). For each measurement, the other two variables are required to
be at the trigger efficiency plateau. The efficiency plateau, where the efficiencies are close to
65% in data and 70% in simulation, is reached for min( pT ) > 12 GeV, max( pT ) > 18 GeV, and

52

1

CMS

-1

36.6 fb -1 (2022) + 27.7 fb (2023) (13.6 TeV)

TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6

max(pT) > 18 GeV, d0 > 0.015 cm

0.4

Run 3 (2022, L3):
Nonprompt J/ψ → µµ
Data 2022
Data 2023

5

10

15

L1T+HLT efficiency

0
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0

20

1

CMS

25

30

min(pT) [GeV]

CMS

36.6 fb -1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6

min(p ) > 12 GeV, d0 > 0.015 cm
T

0.4

Run 3 (2022,L3):
Nonprompt J/ψ → µµ
Data 2022
Data 2023

0
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

max(pT) [GeV]

36.6 fb -1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6

min(pT) > 12 GeV, max(pT) > 18 GeV

0.4

Run 3 (2022, L3):
Nonprompt J/ψ
Data 2022
Data 2023

0.2

Data/Sim.

1

0.2

Data/Sim.

0.2

Data/Sim.

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

min(d0 ) > 0.015 cm. The main loss of efficiency at the plateau comes from inefficiencies in the
double-muon L1Ts to select two muons with small spatial separation. This inefficiency is particularly prominent in J/ψ → µµ events, as they typically have 0.05 < ∆R(µµ ) < 0.15. There is
some remaining efficiency of around 15% at pT values less than the trigger pT thresholds. This
is because of differences between the online and offline L3 muon reconstructions, which can
provide different estimations of the pT and d0 parameters.

0
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0

0.02

0.04

→ µµ

0.06

0.08

0.1

min(d0) [cm]

Figure 42: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers in 2022 data (filled black
circles), 2023 data (filled red triangles), and simulation (open green squares) as a function of
min( pT ) (upper left), max( pT ) (upper right), and min(d0 ) (lower) of the two muons forming
TMS-TMS dimuons in events enriched in J/ψ → µµ events. The efficiency in data is the fraction
of J/ψ → µµ events recorded by the triggers based on the information from jets and pmiss
that
T
also satisfy the requirements of the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers. It is compared to the efficiency
of the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers in a combination of simulated samples of J/ψ → µµ events
produced in various b hadron decays. The lower panels show the ratio of the data to simulated
events.
We also use a sample of J/ψ → µµ events, recorded with the Run 2 (2018) trigger and containing
TMS-TMS dimuon candidates with an invariant mass of 3.0 < mµµ < 3.2 GeV, to evaluate the
efficiency of the Run 3 (2022, L3) and Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks) triggers. Out of this sample of
events recorded with the Run 2 (2018) trigger, we compute how many events also pass the
Run 3 (2022, L3) and Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks) triggers. This efficiency is shown in Fig. 43 (upper
left) for the Run 3 (2022, L3) trigger, split in the 2022 and 2023 years, with an efficiency higher
than 90% for dimuons with min(d0 ) > 0.012 cm; and in Fig. 43 (upper right) for the combined
2022 and 2023 years and both triggers. The observation that the Run 3 (2022, L3) and Run 3
(2022, L3 dTks) triggers have a lower efficiency than the Run 2 (2018) trigger is expected, since

6.4

53

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

a veto is applied in the Run 3 triggers. As stated earlier, the Run 2 (2018) trigger continues to
be used during Run 3.

1

CMS

0.8

36.6 fb-1 (2022) + 27 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

TMS-TMS

Run 3 (2022, L3):
Data 2022

0.6

HLT efficiency

HLT efficiency

Figure 43 (lower) shows the invariant mass distribution for TMS-TMS dimuons in events
recorded by the Run 2 (2018) triggers, and the subset of events also selected by the Run 3
(2022, L3) or Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks) triggers. This last trigger provides larger signal efficiency
and background rejection than the Run 3 (2022, L3) trigger.
1

CMS

0.8

36.6 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

TMS-TMS

0.6

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 3 (2022, L3))

0.4

0.4

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks))

0.2

0.2

Data 2023

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0
0

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

min(d0) [cm]

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 2 (2018))

109

0.02

36.6 fb-1 (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

CMS
Events / 4 GeV

0.1

min(d0) [cm]

TMS-TMS

Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 3 (2022, L3))
Data 2022 + 2023 (Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks))

8

10

107
106
105
104
103
102
10
1

0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200

mµµ [GeV]

Figure 43: The HLT efficiency (upper left), defined as the fraction of events recorded by the
Run 2 (2018) triggers that also satisfy the requirements of the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers, as
a function of offline-reconstructed min(d0 ) of the two muons forming TMS-TMS dimuons in
events enriched in J/ψ → µµ, for the 2022 and 2023 data-taking periods. The black circles
represent efficiencies during the 2022 data-taking period, and the red triangles represent the
2023 period. For dimuons with offline min(d0 ) > 0.012 cm, the combined efficiency of the
L3 muon reconstruction and the online min(d0 ) requirement is larger than 90% in all datataking periods. The HLT efficiency of the Run 3 (2022, L3) triggers (upper right), shown with
blue triangles, and the Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks) triggers, shown with green squares, for J/ψ →
µµ events in the 2022 and 2023 data sets. Invariant mass distribution for TMS-TMS dimuons
(lower) in events recorded by the Run 2 (2018) triggers in the combined 2022 and 2023 data set
(black circles), and in the subset of events also selected by the Run 3 (2022, L3) trigger (blue
triangles) and Run 3 (2022, L3 dTks) trigger (green squares), illustrating the prompt muon
rejection of the L3 triggers.
In 2024, a few displaced single-muon triggers were added. At L1, a single-muon BMTF trigger
requires a high-purity muon with pT > 15 GeV, calculated without applying a beam-axis constraint to the track. This trigger seeds two paths at the HLT: one path that requires at least one
L2 muon with pT > 50 GeV and rejects events with at least one L3 muon with d0 < 1 cm, and

Contents

54

Contents

1
Introduction
Theoretical
. . first
. . . . . . . . . . . .
another path that requires at least one L3 muon
with
pT > 30and
GeV
and d0 >Motivation
0.01 cm. The
2 reject
Data
and Monte
Carlo Simulation
Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
path aims to select events with L2 muons but
prompt
L3 muons.
The second
path aims
2.1
Data
Samples
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
to select events with L3 muons that are at least slightly displaced.
2.2

Standard Model Background Process Simulation . . . . .

4.1

Event Pile-up Reweighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The motivation for including these displaced single-muon
triggers is twofold. First, these trig2.3
Signal Process Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
gers provide the opportunity to collect displaced dimuon events when the subleading muon is
3
Event Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
difficult to reconstruct at the L1T or HLT, thus providing additional signal efficiency. Second,
3.1
Analysis Preselection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the displaced single-muon triggers also expand the CMS sensitivity to additional models, such
3.2
Selection Efficiency for Signal Processes . . . . . . . . . .
as those containing leptonic decays of displaced tau leptons [99–101] or models with a single
4
Corrections to the Monte Carlo Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
displaced muon, such as those produced from the decay of a supersymmetric muon [126].
The total rates of the displaced single-muon and4.2dimuon
triggers
describedand
here
are 67 andCorrections . .
Lepton
Reconstruction
Identification
102 Hz, respectively.
4.3
Trigger Efficiency Corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Background Estimation Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1
QCD Multi-jet Background Estimation . . . . . . . . . . .
Z/g⇤ !since
tt Background
Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
Another displaced-dimuon trigger has also been 5.2
implemented
Run 2. This
trigger is. de5.3in Ref.
Other
Backgrounds
. . . leptons
. . . . . are
. . not
. . . . . . . . . . . .
signed for the displaced-lepton analysis, described
[127],
where the two
required to come from a common displaced6vertex.
This signature
Systematic
Errors . is
. .shown
. . . . .with
. . . a. simulated
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
signal event in Fig. 44 and can arise, e.g., in an
7 R-parity
Results violating
. . . . . . SUSY
. . . . model
. . . . .with
. . . long-lived
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
top squarks that decay into displaced quarks and7.1
leptonsEvent
[128],Yields
a GMSB
model
with
long-lived
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
sleptons that decay into a gravitino and a lepton [129],
a model with
BSM Higgs
7.2 and
Limit-Setting
Procedure
. . . bosons
. . . . . that
. . . . . . . . . . . .
decay into two long-lived scalar particles, which7.3
each decay
into
two
displaced
leptons
[130].
Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
At the HLT, this trigger requires at least two L3 muons,
each with and
pT >outlook
43 GeV.. .The
7.4
Discussion
. . fits
. . .to. .the
. . . . . . . . . . .
muon tracks are not constrained to the PV, thus
providing
the
trigger
with
a
higher
acceptance
8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
for displaced muons. This HLT path is seeded
byEvent
L1 dimuon
triggers. The total rate of these
A
Displays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.4.2

5

Double displaced L3 muon triggers

HLT paths is about 2 Hz.

CMS Simulation
Simulation1
CMS

! beTheoretical
bµ
Introductiont̃t̃and
Motivation
d~0
[cm]
[cm]

t̃t̃ !
XX
→ ℓbe
ℓ2Y
1Y bµ

beamspot of a new boson with a mass of rou
The
discovery
axis
t̃t̃ !beam
be bµ
~
0
[1, d2],
whose
properties are, to-date, consistent
t̃t̃ !
be bµ
[cm]~
0
dardd[cm]
model (SM) Higgs boson, has underscored
tance of investigating models that are designed
for the mathematical inconsistencies that are co
of introducing the Higgs potential.
y

x

z

Figure 44: Diagram of a simulated signal event in the inclusive displaced-lepton search [127],
from a transverse view of the IP. The cyan
andthis
red solid
lines indicate
the trajectories
of the
For
search,
the most
relevant
of these uns
two leptons, and the two dashed lines indicate the extrapolation of the trajectories towards
their point of closest approach to the beam axis. The black arrows, which point from the beam
axis and are orthogonal to the cyan and red dotted lines, indicate the lepton d0 vectors. Figure
adapted from Ref. [131].
Figure 45 shows the efficiency of this trigger for HAHM signal events, as a function of the
min( pT ) of the two global or tracker muons in the event. The HAHM signal is used here, rather

6.4

55

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

L1T+HLT efficiency

than one of the signals mentioned above that are targeted by this trigger, to facilitate comparison with the efficiency of other displaced-muon triggers. The trigger efficiency is shown as
a function of muon pT , illustrating that the double displaced L3 muon trigger is fully efficient
for offline muons with min( pT ) > 48 GeV. Furthermore, this trigger has 100% efficiency in
the HAHM signal benchmark models, for min(d0 ) values smaller than the inner radius of the
tracker. The HLT path does not exhibit the typical rise in efficiency at small min(d0 ) values
because no displacement requirement is imposed by this trigger.
1.2
1

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation
TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6
0.4
H → 2ZD → 2µ 2X (125, 50, 4e-09)
H → 2ZD → 2µ 2X (125, 60, 2e-09)

0.2
0
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

(DoubleMu43)
(DoubleMu43)

100

min(p ) [GeV]
T

Figure 45: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the double displaced L3 muon trigger as a function of
min( pT ) of the two global or tracker muons in the event. The efficiency is plotted for HAHM
signal events for 2022 conditions with mZ D = 50 GeV and ϵ = 4 × 10−9 (black triangles), mZ D =
60 GeV and ϵ = 2 × 10−9 (red triangles), and mH = 125 GeV in both cases. The events are
required to have at least two good global or tracker muons with pT > 23 GeV.
Figure 46 shows the efficiency of the double displaced L3 muon trigger in J/ψ-enriched events
in 2022 data and simulation (the same J/ψ-enriched samples used in Section 6.4.1), as a function
of the min(d0 ) (left) and min( pT ) (right) of the two global or tracker muons in the event. Data
and simulation agree within the uncertainties. In the displaced-lepton analysis [127], trigger
scale factors are applied to the simulation to improve the data-to-simulation agreement.
6.4.3

Displaced L3 muon + photon triggers

Several mixed-object triggers, which select at least one photon and at least one displaced muon
at the HLT, have been used in CMS since Run 2. These triggers are designed for the analysis
described in Ref. [127] that searches for two LLPs that are produced in pp collisions and decay
in the detector. One of the LLPs decays into a displaced muon and other final state particles,
and the other LLP decays into a displaced electron and other final state particles. This signature,
shown in Fig. 44, can arise in the same theoretical scenarios discussed in Section 6.4.2. The
displaced electron and muon need not necessarily come from the same displaced vertex. In this
way, the HLT photon is a proxy for a displaced electron. To be sensitive to larger displacements
and to limit bias towards lower displacements, the displaced electron track is not reconstructed
at the HLT, but only in the offline analysis.
At the HLT, there is a muon-photon mixed-object trigger that requires an L3 muon, whose track
fit is not constrained to the PV, with pT > 43 GeV. This trigger also requires a photon at the

36.6 fb-1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

1.2

L1T+HLT efficiency

L1T+HLT efficiency

56

CMS

1

TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6
0.4

36.6 fb -1 (2022) (13.6 TeV)

1.2

CMS
1

TMS-TMS

0.8
0.6
0.4

Nonprompt J/ψ→µµ

Nonprompt J/ψ→µµ

0.2

0.2
Data

0

0

0.02

0.04

Data

0.06

0.08

0.1

min(d0) [cm]

0
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

min(p ) [GeV]
T

Figure 46: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the double displaced L3 muon trigger in 2022, as a function of min(d0 ) (left) and min( pT ) (right) of the two global or tracker muons in the event. The
efficiency is plotted for simulated J/ψ → µµ events produced in various b hadron decays (open
green squares) and data enriched in J/ψ → µµ events recorded by jet- and pmiss
T -based triggers
(filled black circles). The events are required to have at least two good global or tracker muons
compatible with the J/ψ meson mass and with pT > 45 GeV (left) or pT > 23 GeV (right).
HLT with pT > 43 GeV as well as a set of loose, calorimeter-based identification selections. No
displacement requirement is imposed in this trigger. In addition, there is another muon-photon
cross-trigger available at the HLT, which makes similar requirements except it lowers the minimum pT requirements on both the HLT photon and the muon to 38 GeV, and to compensate for
the rate increase, it requires the muon to have d0 > 1 cm. In this way, the efficiency to trigger
on lower-pT signals is increased. Both muon-photon mixed-object HLT paths are seeded by
muon-e/γ L1Ts.
The total rate of these HLT paths is about 5 Hz. The performance of the displaced L3 muon
leg of this trigger can be seen from the performance of double displaced L3 muon triggers, as
described in Section 6.4.2 and shown in Figs. 45 and 46. The performance of the photon leg of
the trigger, which is a standard photon reconstructed at the HLT, is described in Ref. [27].
6.4.4

Dimuon scouting triggers

Dimuon scouting triggers, which are fully documented in Ref. [45], have been available since
2017. Their purpose is to provide substantially lower muon minimum pT thresholds compared
to standard triggers. In particular, the dimuon scouting triggers require both muons to have
pT > 3 GeV at the HLT, as opposed to standard dimuon triggers, which historically required
pT > 17 and 8 GeV for the leading and subleading pT muons, respectively. Since Run 3, an inclusive dimuon trigger strategy has been implemented to collect events in the low-mass region
(lower mass than the Υ peak) using the parked data, with pT thresholds as low as those used for
scouting. However, dedicated scouting muon reconstruction still makes scouting the optimal
strategy for displaced muon signatures compared to parking. This is because the dimuon scouting triggers use HLT reconstruction algorithms that lack any constraint on the muon trajectories
to the PV. This enables scouting searches for resonances that have nonzero displacement from
the PV, such as the search described in Ref. [132]. This search targets a displaced dimuon signature similar to the one described in Section 6.4.1, but focused on signals with lower dimuon
masses, such as a scenario with an SM-like Higgs boson that decays to four leptons via two
intermediate dark photons or through the Higgs portal via a dark Higgs boson [90]. Figure 38,
which is shown above in Section 6.4.1, illustrates an example signal event that is also applicable
for the search that uses dimuon scouting triggers.

6.4

57

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

In Run 2, the dimuon scouting HLT paths required that muon tracks leave hits in at least two
layers of the pixel detector. This requirement limited the maximum muon d0 to about 11 cm.
At the beginning of Run 3, this pixel detector hit requirement was removed from the scouting
muon reconstruction algorithm, which increased the trigger efficiency for displaced muons, as
they may be sufficiently displaced to leave no hits in the pixel detector. This change occurred at
the same time as the L1T BMTF improvement mentioned in Section 6.4.1, which also improved
the displaced-muon trigger performance.

Events / 0.1 cm (normalized to unit)

CMS

32.0 fb -1 (13 TeV) + 17.6 fb-1 (13.6 TeV)

10

5

10

4

Run 2

3

Run 3

10

Position of pixel detector layers: 2.9-6.8-10.9-16.0 cm

10 2
10
1
10-1
10-2
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Lxy [cm]

Figure 47: Comparison between the Lxy distribution for dimuon scouting events for Run 2
(orange) and Run 3 (blue) events in data that contain dimuon pairs with a common displaced
vertex and a minimal selection on the vertex quality. The blue Run 3 line is obtained from
the vertex-unconstrained muon reconstruction algorithm. The dashed vertical lines, at radii
of 2.9, 6.8, 10.9, and 16.0 cm, correspond to the positions of the pixel detector layers where
photons undergo conversion processes in the material, causing the observed peaks in the Lxy
distribution. Figure taken from Ref. [45].
Figure 47 shows the distribution of the dimuon vertex transverse displacement Lxy , for events
that contain at least one pair of opposite-sign muons associated with a selected secondary vertex. Events are collected with dimuon displacements up to about 100 cm, a radial distance that
corresponds to the effective end of the region of the tracker available for track reconstruction.
At the positions of the pixel detector layers, with radii of 29, 68, 109, and 160 mm, photons
undergoing conversion processes in the material lead to peaks in the Lxy distribution. These
peaks are less pronounced in the Run 3 distribution because of the removal of the pixel detector hit requirement, which leads to higher efficiency, but also lower purity, if no additional
analysis-specific quality criteria are required, as is the case here. While the removal of this requirement increases the background yield, it recovers potential displaced signal vertices that
would otherwise be lost. This strategy, combined with appropriate background rejection techniques, ultimately improves the CMS sensitivity to exotic displaced decays.
A combination of L1T algorithms requiring one of two options is employed. These options
are to require either at least two muons with minimum pT thresholds of 15 and 7 GeV for the
leading and subleading muon, respectively, or two opposite-sign muons with no explicit pT
thresholds and an additional selection on the invariant mass or angular separation. The proportional rate of these triggers at L1 amounts to about 10 kHz at the highest luminosity for an
average PU of 60. Events selected by at least one of the L1 seeds are then reconstructed at HLT

58

L1T + HLT efficiency

1.0

4.1 fb 1 (2024) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

Dimuon Level-1 seeds
Dimuon HLT scouting trigger

0.8
0.6

Vertex-unconstrained reconstruction

N (no vtx) 2, R( 1, 2) > 0.1, track 2/ndof < 3

0.4
0.2
0.00

10

20

30

40

50

Subleading scouting muon pT [GeV]

Figure 48: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the dimuon scouting trigger as a function of the subleading muon pT , for 2024 data. The efficiency of the L1T dimuon seeds (pink squares) and the
HLT dimuon scouting trigger with the vertex-unconstrained reconstruction algorithm (blue
triangles) is shown. The events in the denominator are required to have at least two vertexunconstrained muons (Nµ (no-vtx) > 2) and additionally to have χ2 /Ndof < 3 and ∆R > 0.1.
with a minimum muon pT requirement of 3 GeV, reducing the HLT rate of the dimuon scouting
trigger to about 4.2 kHz.
The efficiency of the dimuon scouting trigger in 2024 data is shown in Fig. 48 and in simulated
HAHM signal events for two illustrative masses of mZ D = 2.5 and 14 GeV in Figs. 49 and 50.
Figure 48 shows that the dimuon scouting trigger efficiency is driven by the L1T, which requires high-quality muons. Figures 49 and 50 demonstrate that the dimuon scouting triggers
are highly efficient for HAHM events, especially for sufficiently large mZ D and small boost. Furthermore, a significant fraction of the muons are reconstructed even for the longest considered
lifetimes. High efficiency is maintained for Lxy values up to about 40 cm. These signal efficiencies also reflect the behavior observed in boosted decays, where the muons are very close
to each other, as occurs for very low masses in the HAHM model. This effect is particularly
significant when mZ D = 2.5 GeV, where muons with larger pT values but also small angular
separation exhibit a reduced trigger efficiency as the pT increases.
Two different scouting muon reconstruction algorithms were developed: one constrained to the
PV and another unconstrained. The vertex-constrained algorithm, which was enabled at the
start of data taking in 2024, is appropriate for prompt muons, while the vertex-unconstrained
algorithm, which has been enabled since 2022, provides higher efficiency for displaced muons.
The reconstruction efficiency of both algorithms as a function of Lxy is compared in Fig. 51 for
HAHM signal events with the same two illustrative masses. Figure 52 shows the pT resolution
of scouting muons with respect to offline muons, as a function of the scouting muon pT , for
2024 data events. The vertex-unconstrained algorithm provides pT resolutions ranging from
0.5 to 1% for pT < 50 GeV and increasing to 2% at 100 GeV, for both barrel and endcap muons.

6.4

59

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

L1T + HLT efficiency

1.0

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)
mZD = 14 GeV, c = 100 mm
mZD = 2.5 GeV, c = 100 mm
H ZD ZD 2 + X
Gen. pT > 15 GeV, | | < 2.4

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00

20

40

60

80

100

Gen.-level Lxy [cm]

Figure 49: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the dimuon scouting trigger as a function of the
generator-level Lxy , for HAHM signal events, for 2024 conditions. The efficiency is shown
for mZ D = 14 GeV and cτ = 100 mm (pink squares) and mZ D = 2.5 GeV and cτ = 100 mm (blue
triangles). The muons are required to have pT > 15 GeV and |η | < 2.4 at the generator level.

0.8

CMS Simulation
H ZD ZD 2 + X
Gen. | | < 2.4

(13.6 TeV)
mZD = 2.5 GeV, c = 1 mm
mZD = 2.5 GeV, c = 10 mm
mZD = 2.5 GeV, c = 100 mm

1.0

L1T + HLT efficiency

L1T + HLT efficiency

1.0

CMS Simulation

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.00

(13.6 TeV)
H ZD ZD 2 + X
Gen. | | < 2.4

10

20

30

40

50

Gen.-level subleading muon pT [GeV]

0.00

mZD = 14 GeV, c = 1 mm
mZD = 14 GeV, c = 10 mm
mZD = 14 GeV, c = 100 mm

10

20

30

40

50

Gen.-level subleading muon pT [GeV]

Figure 50: The L1T+HLT efficiency of the dimuon scouting trigger as a function of the
generator-level subleading muon pT , for HAHM signal events for 2024 conditions. The efficiency is shown for Z D masses of 2.5 (left) and 14 GeV (right), and cτ values of 1 (purple squares), 10 (blue triangles), and 100 mm (pink circles). The muons are required to have
|η | < 2.4 at the generator level.
The vertex-constrained algorithm provides pT resolutions of less than 0.5% for the barrel and
between 0.5 and 1% in the endcaps.

60

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

Vertex-constrained
reconstruction
Vertex-unconstrained
reconstruction

0.8

H ZD ZD 2 + X
mZD = 14 GeV, c = 100 mm
Gen. pT > 15 GeV, | | < 2.4

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2
0.00

Vertex-constrained
reconstruction
Vertex-unconstrained
reconstruction

0.8

H ZD ZD 2 + X
mZD = 2.5 GeV, c = 100 mm
Gen. pT > 15 GeV, | | < 2.4

0.6

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

1.0

Scouting muon reconstruction efficiency

Scouting muon reconstruction efficiency

1.0

0.2

20

40

60

80

0.00

100

Gen.-level Lxy [cm]

20

40

60

80

100

Gen.-level Lxy [cm]

Figure 51: Scouting muon reconstruction efficiency of the vertex-constrained (pink circles) and
vertex-unconstrained (blue triangles) algorithms as a function of the generator-level Lxy , for
HAHM signal events for 2024 conditions. This efficiency is representative of the reconstruction
efficiency of the L2 and L3 HLT muon reconstruction employed for scouting data. The efficiency is shown for mZ D = 2.5 GeV and cτ = 100 mm (left) and mZ D = 14 GeV and cτ = 100 mm
(right). The muons are required to have pT > 15 GeV and |η | < 2.4 at the generator level.
108 fb-1 (2024) (13.6 TeV)

CMS
0.035

RMS

T

T

poff

T

pscout-poff

0.04
µ

Dimuon events, ∆Rµµ > 0.2, p > 3 GeV
T

Barrel: vertex-unconstrained reconstruction

0.03

Endcap: vertex-unconstrained reconstruction
Barrel: vertex-constrained reconstruction

0.025

Endcap: vertex-constrained reconstruction
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Scouting muon p [GeV]
T

Figure 52: The pT resolution of scouting muons with respect to offline muons, as a function
of the scouting muon pT , for 2024 data events. The root mean square (RMS) of the difference
of the scouting muon pT and the offline muon pT , divided by the offline muon pT , is plotted.
The dimuon ∆R is required to be greater than 0.2, and the scouting muon pT is required to be
greater than 3 GeV. The resolution is shown for muons in the barrel (filled blue circles) and
the endcaps (filled purple triangles) that are reconstructed with both the vertex-unconstrained
reconstruction algorithm, as well as for muons in the barrel (filled red squares) and the endcaps (open orange squares) that are reconstructed with the vertex-constrained reconstruction
algorithm. A special monitoring data set is used that collects events triggered by a mixture of
HLT paths (both scouting and standard triggers) with a very high prescaling factor, in which
all information about the muon objects is stored from the offline and scouting reconstruction.

6.4

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

6.4.5

61

Muon detector shower triggers with the CSCs

In CMS, LLPs with sufficiently long lifetime, produced at the PV in pp collisions, could reach
the muon system before decaying, creating an MDS signature. The defining feature of LLP
decays within the CMS muon system is the multiplicity of hits created by particle showers. This
starkly contrasts with what a typical muon would deposit in the detector, which is several hits
in each detection layer that form a trajectory pointing to the IP. Some Run 2 analyses have used
this MDS signature offline, as described in Refs. [9, 10], relying on other objects to provide the
trigger. To improve the CMS sensitivity to this striking signature, several novel MDS triggers
have been commissioned for Run 3 data taking.
The overall strategy at the L1T is first to identify the LLP showers by counting the number of
hits in individual CSC chambers (Nhits ). Because the capacity of each stage of the trigger is
limited, the information is progressively compressed as it moves through the system. The first
stage reduces the chamber-level hit information to a small number of bits indicating whether a
shower is present. Subsequent stages then aggregate these chamber-level flags. The processor
checks whether a chamber shows a shower and encodes this in only a few bits. Finally, an algorithm in the global muon trigger determines whether a shower is present anywhere in the full
detector, again encoding this result in a compact form and sending it to the global trigger for
the final decision. In essence, each stage performs a logical OR-type reduction and transmits an
increasingly condensed representation of the shower activity through the off-detector electronics. Hits per bunch crossing are counted in each CSC chamber by the CSC local trigger, which
has both anode wire and cathode strip readout. Optimized thresholds are set on each station
individually to evaluate whether Nhits is above or below such thresholds. The greater available resources of the optical trigger motherboard allow the trigger to detect the coincidence
of anode and cathode counts above thresholds for chambers in ring 1, while an anode-only
logic is used for chambers in rings 2 and 3. This information is encoded in several bits called
“loose”, “nominal”, and “tight”, each with a different threshold, and then transferred to the
EMTF processors. Likewise, the EMTF transmits information to the global muon trigger about
the existence or absence of any chamber passing the counting criteria. Finally, the global muon
trigger transfers the information to the global trigger, and the L1 physics seeds (One-Nominal,
One-Tight, and Two-Loose) are created. In the case of the Two-Loose strategy, which targets
pair-produced LLPs, the global muon trigger evaluates if there are at least two different stations with any chamber above relaxed thresholds, which vary depending on the chamber. A
display of one CMS event selected by this trigger in 2022 data is shown in Fig. 53.
The efficiency of the trigger to select LLPs is evaluated with a sample of H → SS → bbbb
events, the diagram for which is shown in Fig. 4. Signal efficiencies are shown in Table 6 for
simulated events with one and two LLPs decaying in the CSC detector acceptance. A larger
mass splitting between mH and mS , which results in LLPs with higher energy, leads to greater
trigger efficiency. The addition of the Two-Loose L1 seed also yields up to a 10% increase in
the signal efficiency, compared to having only the One-Nominal seed, when both LLPs decay
within the CSC detector acceptance.
At the HLT, hits from all the CSC chambers are available and can be used to reconstruct cluster
objects. This allows the HLT to capture the properties of signal showers across multiple CSC
chambers, thus rejecting more backgrounds. The CSC 3D spatial points (hits) are clustered
using the Cambridge–Aachen algorithm [133, 134] in η-ϕ space with a distance parameter of
0.4. A cluster object is required to have at least 50 hits, a threshold approximately two times
higher than a typical muon would create in the muon system.
The additional cluster properties available at the HLT allow for the design of various trigger

62

Figure 53: Event display of a collision triggered by the CSC MDS trigger in Run 3 data. The
CSC reconstructed hits are represented by blue dots in the muon endcap region. This event
features a CSC cluster of 210 hits in the ME1/3 ring. The event was recorded on October 8th,
2022.
Table 6: The L1T CSC MDS trigger efficiency ϵ in H → SS → bbbb events, for different choices
of mH , mS , and cτS , for simulated events with at least 1 (middle columns) and exactly 2 (right
columns) LLPs decaying within the CSC detector acceptance. The ϵacc refers to the percentage
of events within the CSC detector acceptance. The ϵ1-N , ϵ1-T , and ϵ2-L denote the efficiencies for
the One-Nominal, One-Tight, and Two-Loose algorithms, respectively.
mH [GeV]

mS [GeV]

cτS [mm]

125
125
250
250
350

12
25
60
120
160

900
1500
10000
10000
10000

≥ 1 LLP decay in CSCs
ϵacc
ϵ1-N
ϵ1-T

2 LLP decays in CSCs
ϵacc
ϵ1-N
ϵ2-L OR ϵ1-N

16.2%
15.9%
10.3%
15.4%
17.9%

0.7%
0.7%
0.3%
1.0%
1.1%

43.1%
43.7%
55.5%
29.9%
39.1%

39.2%
40.0%
52.1%
27.7%
36.7%

69.6%
75.1%
74.0%
44.4%
63.4%

75.0%
79.7%
78.2%
49.6%
69.6%

paths to target different LLP production modes, as shown in Table 2. The single-MDS path,
which was introduced in time for 2022 data taking, is the most generic, whereas the doubleMDS path (introduced in 2023) targets pair-produced LLP models more efficiently because of
its looser cluster selections. For LLPs produced together with a lepton or photon, additional
cross-trigger paths were introduced in time for 2024 data taking, where the trigger thresholds
for both the cluster and the lepton/photon selections are lowered.
The L1T efficiency as a function of Nhits for one of the CSC rings and the L1T rates for OneNominal and Two-Loose as a function of PU are shown in Fig. 54. The efficiencies for other CSC
rings are shown in Ref. [96]. To evaluate the efficiency of individual CSC rings, CSC clusters
created by muon bremsstrahlung-induced electromagnetic showers are used as proxies for LLP
signal clusters in data. The efficiency is defined as the fraction of events that pass the CSC MDS
One-Nominal L1 seed, given that an uncorrelated trigger selects the data and that a muon is
matched to a CSC cluster. Because the L1 thresholds of different CSC rings are different, the
efficiency is measured separately for each CSC ring. Thus, the centroid position of the cluster
is restricted to be within a single CSC ring (e.g., ME2/2), and at least 90% of the hits in the
clusters must be contained in the same CSC ring.
Figure 54 also shows that the L1T rates of both the One-Nominal and Two-Loose seeds are

6.4

63

Muon spectrometer-based algorithms

L1T efficiency

L1T rate [Hz]

2023 (13.6 TeV)
-1

23.1 fb (2022) + 27.7 fb-1 (2023) (13.6 TeV)

CMS

2500

2000

1500

One-Nominal data
One-Nominal linear fit
Two-Loose data

1000

Two-Loose linear fit

ME2/2

500

HLT threshold
Data 2022+2023

0

40

45

50

55

60

PU

Figure 54: The L1T efficiency of the One-Nominal CSC MDS trigger in a single CSC ring
(ME2/2, indicated in Fig. 1) as a function of the number of hits in the cluster, measured with
muon bremsstrahlung-induced electromagnetic showers using data taken in 2022 and 2023
(left). The efficiency is defined as the fraction of events that pass the One-Nominal CSC MDS
trigger, given that an uncorrelated trigger selects the data and that a muon is matched to a CSC
cluster. The L1T rate as a function of PU for the One-Nominal and Two-Loose seed for a 2023
data-taking run (right). The rate dependence on PU is extracted by a linear fit.
proportional to the average PU. The cluster selections at the HLT further reduce the L1T rates
by a factor of 170, such that the single- and double-MDS paths have a combined total rate of
14 Hz. The CSC MDS cross triggers provide an additional 14 Hz total rate at the HLT at the
same instantaneous luminosity.
6.4.6

Muon detector shower triggers with the DTs

Similar to the MDS signature in the CSCs described in Section 6.4.5, an LLP decaying in the DTs
in the muon system can produce showers from the resulting decay products. These showers
can be identified via clusters of hits in the DTs, using this subsystem as a sampling calorimeter. The DTs provide complementary coverage to that of the CSC MDS triggers described in
Section 6.4.5. In Run 2, CMS performed a search for LLPs using the DT cluster showers with
competitive limits on various models, including those with Higgs boson decays to LLPs, and
produced the first LHC limit on a strong dark-sector coupling to the Higgs boson [10].
In Run 3, dedicated triggers have been introduced that target a cluster of hits in the DTs opposite a jet from ISR or final-state radiation. Figure 55 provides a visual representation of this
signature. This trigger enables a more model-independent search for LLPs decaying in the DTs.
The trigger uses pmiss
with a minimum threshold of 150 GeV as the L1 seed; implementing a
T
dedicated DT MDS trigger at the L1T was impossible because of the lack of processing capacity. At the HLT, DT clusters are reconstructed similarly to the CSCs, and Nhits > 50 is required.
Hits from the first DT station, MB1, are excluded from the clusters, as it has the least amount of
material between it and the IP and thus higher backgrounds. Furthermore, another HLT path
was implemented that requires the One-Nominal MDS CSC cluster at the L1T and at least one
DT cluster at the HLT. This path recovers some efficiency for the case where multiple clusters
are created in the transition region between the barrel and the endcaps. The total trigger rate
of the DT MDS paths at the HLT is 9 Hz.
Figure 56 shows the trigger efficiencies with respect to the offline selections, for simulated
signal events. The cluster used at the HLT is identical to the offline one, which leads to close to
100% efficiency. Events with fewer than 50 hits are not allowed by the trigger algorithm, and

64

Figure 55: Diagram of the MDS signature in the DTs. The LLP decays in the DTs, opposite a jet
from ISR.
so there are no measurement points in Fig. 56 with Nhits < 50.

1.0

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

1.0

0.8

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

0.8

H SS 4b
mH = 125 GeV, mS = 40 GeV, c = 1 m
DT MDS

0.6
0.4

H SS 4b
mH = 125 GeV, mS = 40 GeV, c = 1 m
DT MDS

0.6
0.4

0.2
0.0 0

1.2

HLT efficiency

HLT efficiency

1.2

0.2

Nhits > 50
200

400

600

800

1000

pmiss
T [GeV]

0.00

pmiss
T > 250 GeV
100

200

300

400

Nhits

Figure 56: The HLT efficiency of the DT MDS triggers as a function of pmiss
(left) and the
T
number of hits in the cluster (right), for simulated H → SS → bbbb events with mH = 125 GeV,
mS = 40 GeV, and cτS = 1 m, for 2023 conditions. Events are required to have at least one
cluster with more than 50 hits (left) and pmiss
> 250 GeV (right).
T

6.5

The No-BPTX algorithms

The No-BPTX trigger algorithms are unique in that they are active only when no proton
bunches are colliding in the detector. They are designed to trigger on LLPs that have espe-

6.5

65

The No-BPTX algorithms

cially long lifetimes, are slow-moving, and come to rest in the detector, decaying at a later time.
These triggers collect data when the beam pickup timing device (BPTX) does not detect the
proton beam, and hence they are called the “No-BPTX” triggers.
Each LHC beam consists of proton bunches arranged in an irregular pattern of “trains” [135].
Within a train, the proton bunches are nominally spaced 25 ns apart, with larger spacings between trains to allow for the injection process. In an LHC orbit, there are 3564 bunch slots (BXs),
which are each 25 ns long. Each BX could be filled with proton bunches, which usually occupy
the first 2.5 ns of the BX, or could be empty. The trains may be spaced such that multiple empty
BXs could be between filled BXs. The maximum occupancy of the LHC in Run 3 was about
2400 colliding bunches, depending on the year. At the end of each LHC orbit, there is a 3.15 µs
long “abort gap”, which is kept free to allow the beam to be dumped cleanly when required.
To search for LLP decays during these empty BXs, the main No-BPTX triggers select events at
least two BXs away from any proton bunches. Thus, these triggers are live only during these
specific time windows. This distance of two BXs is chosen so that we maximize the search time
window while suppressing most of the events from secondary pp interactions and from “beam
halo”, arising from muons traveling outside the LHC beam, which are produced by LHC beamcollimator scattering. As a result, these triggers collect most of their data during the LHC abort
gap. The No-BPTX algorithm is present in dedicated L1 seeds with jet and muon variants.
Higher pT thresholds for the jets and muons are employed at the HLT to suppress backgrounds
and lower the rate to a few Hz. The jet and muon No-BPTX triggers are discussed in more
detail below, in Sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.2, respectively.
6.5.1

Jet No-BPTX triggers

The jet No-BPTX triggers have been used since Run 1 to trigger on hadronic decays of LLPs that
become stopped in the dense inactive material in the CMS calorimeters [15, 136]. Such stopped
LLPs arise, e.g., in BSM scenarios with long-lived gluinos [105, 107] or top squarks [137–139].
This signature is illustrated in Fig. 57.

LLP comes to a stop

Figure 57: Diagram of a stopped-particle event, which can be selected by the jet No-BPTX
triggers. The dotted black arrow indicates the LLP, such as a gluino, that travels through the
detector before coming to a stop in the dense material of the HCAL. After some time, this
stopped particle decays hadronically, producing a significant energy deposit in the HCAL.
The jet No-BPTX triggers are designed to trigger on extremely out-of-time calo jets at the HLT
with energy greater than 60 GeV, |η | < 3, and at least two BXs separation from pp collisions.
A requirement is placed on the total energy of the jets instead of the transverse energy because
the stopped particles will decay isotropically, not necessarily predominantly in the transverse
plane. These triggers primarily select events with beam halo and noise in the calorimeters;
thus, their rates are largely independent of PU. The total rate of these HLT paths is less than
2 Hz at the maximum number of colliding proton bunches.

66
6.5.2

Muon No-BPTX triggers

The muon No-BPTX triggers, like the jet No-BPTX triggers, select events when there are no colliding bunches of protons in the detector, i.e., empty BXs. The muon versions of these triggers
select out-of-time L2 muons and have taken data since Run 1. The main trigger selects events
at least two BXs away from the pp collision time with at least one muon reconstructed in the
muon system with pT > 40 GeV. This trigger primarily selects cosmic ray muons that have
produced showers of particles in the CMS detector or the rock above it. Thus, the rate of this
trigger depends on the number of filled bunch crossings but is largely constant as a function of
PU.

HLT rate [Hz]

The rate of the main muon No-BPTX HLT path as a function of the number of colliding bunches
is shown in Fig. 58. The rate decreases linearly as the number of proton bunches increases and
as fewer empty BXs are available for the No-BPTX trigger. The rate increase from Run 2 to
Run 3 is expected, as a result of the increase in rate from the backgrounds in the EMTF, and
the increase in rate of the LHC backgrounds overall from the increase in center-of-mass energy.
The total rate of these HLT paths is about 7 Hz at the maximum number of colliding proton
bunches.

(13 and 13.6 TeV)

30
CMS

2016
2017
2018
2022
2023
2024

20

10

0
0

1000

2000
3000
Number of colliding bunches

Figure 58: Rate of the main muon No-BPTX HLT path as a function of the number of colliding
bunches, for different years in Run 2 and Run 3.
The muon No-BPTX triggers are used to trigger on the muonic decays of stopped LLPs [15],
that arise, for example, in models with long-lived gluinos [105, 107] or multiply charged particles [140]. This signature of a stopped particle decaying into two back-to-back muons is illustrated in Fig. 59 and was probed in the latest stopped-particle analysis [15]. It should be noted
that the muon No-BPTX triggers are also efficient for other signatures, as the triggers simply
require at least one out-of-time muon.

7

Long-lived particle trigger acceptances

Different types of LLP triggers (Section 6) often have significant acceptance for a given benchmark LLP signal model (Section 5). By comparing the trigger acceptance as a function of the
LLP cτ or decay position, we demonstrate the complementarity of the diverse trigger strate-

67

µ1

LLP comes to a stop

µ2

Figure 59: Diagram of a stopped-particle event, which can be selected by the muon No-BPTX
triggers. The dotted black arrow indicates the LLP that travels through the detector before
coming to a stop in the steel yoke in the muon system. After some time, this stopped particle
decays to two back-to-back muons.
gies and their contributions to the CMS physics program. The trigger acceptances for models
that predict neutral LLPs are shown first for hadronic and leptonic signatures, followed by the
acceptances for models that predict charged LLPs.
The signal acceptance is defined as the ratio of the number of LLPs passing the respective HLT
requirements, given that the LLPs decay in the corresponding fiducial region of the detector
shown in Fig. 60. For example, the signal acceptance for MDS triggers using CSCs is computed
with respect to the decay of LLPs within the fiducial region of the CSCs. The fiducial region
used in the tracker-based displaced-jet triggers is defined as R < 300 cm, |z| < 560 cm, and
|η | < 2.0. Here, the fiducial region extends from the tracker into the calorimeters because
some of the tracking-based displaced-jet algorithms rely on calo jets with a prompt track veto,
enabling sensitivity to displaced LLP decays beyond the tracker volume itself. For the ECALbased (HCAL-based) delayed-jet triggers, the fiducial region is defined as R < 152 (300) cm
and |η | < 1.48 (1.26), which corresponds to the barrel region of ECAL (the barrel region of
HCAL with full segmentation information). For the MDS triggers using the DT and CSCs,
the fiducial region is defined as 200 < R < 800 cm and |z| < 661 cm for the DTs, and R <
695 cm, 400 < |z| < 1100 cm, and 0.9 < |η | < 2.4 for the CSCs. For the CSC MDS triggers,
the fiducial region is extended in front of the muon system to include the LLPs that initiate
hadronic showers in the solenoid and HCAL.
The performance of the different LLP triggers is shown here for the benchmark H → SS →
bbbb process, the diagram for which was shown above in Fig. 4.
Figures 61 and 62 show the trigger acceptances at the HLT for various hadronic LLP triggers,
as functions of the LLP decay radial and z positions, respectively. The plots correspond to
different choices of mH and mX .
Figure 61 demonstrates the complementarity of the LLP triggers, as the displaced-jet triggers using the tracker have high acceptance for the smallest decay vertex radial distances, the

68

Figure 60: The fiducial regions defined for the calculation of each trigger acceptance in Figs. 61
and 62. The “Tracker” region labeled in this figure refers to the fiducial region of the displacedjet triggers using the tracker, which is larger than the physical volume of the tracker detector.
The text contains the exact definitions of each region.
delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing provide higher acceptance up until the start of the
ECAL, the displaced-jet triggers using the HCAL provide acceptance throughout the HCAL,
and the MDS triggers with the DTs and CSCs provide acceptance inside the muon system. Figure 62 demonstrates the complementarity of these triggers as a function of LLP decay z position
using both the barrel and endcap of various subdetector systems.
In Fig. 62, for z positions between 700 and 1000 cm, the acceptance of the MDS triggers with
the CSCs (pink points) varies in the 30–80% range, for mH = 125 GeV and mX = 25 GeV (lower
right plot). This variation reflects the positions of the CSCs. Depending on the LLP decay position, the decay products pass through different thickness of steel, which needs to be thick
enough to initiate the hadronic shower but not too thick to attenuate the particles before reaching a CSC. This effect is more prominent when the LLP energy is smaller, hence the structure
in the lower right plot is more obvious.
Figure 63 shows the trigger acceptance for the CSC and DT MDS triggers as a function of LLP
cτ. Figure 63 (left) illustrates the improvement of the dedicated CSC MDS triggers in Run 3
with respect to the Run 2 trigger strategy, which relies on triggering on pmiss
T . Figure 63 (right)
illustrates the improved performance of the DT MDS triggers in Run 3 over that of the Run 2
trigger strategy, namely, triggering on pmiss
at the L1T and HLT. Since the Run 3 MDS triggers
T
in the DTs still rely on pmiss
in
the
L1T
because
of rate constraints, the improvement is less
T
significant than that of the CSC trigger paths.
Figure 64 shows the L1T and HLT acceptances for the CSC MDS trigger as a function of the
LLP decay position along the z-axis. The L1T (HLT) acceptance is approximately 40 (10)% for
showers in the ME1/1 region because high thresholds are needed in this CSC station to suppress hadronic punchthrough. However, the acceptance increases to around 70 (60)% in the
other stations. The shaded regions represent steel within the CSC system, and the structure
observed in the acceptance distribution partly reflects variations in steel thickness, which influence shower development. The corresponding acceptance distributions for the DT MDS

69

1

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

400

500

CMS Simulation

1

mH = 350 GeV
mX = 160 GeV

Muon DTs

HCAL

ECAL

CSCs

Tracker

0.8

H → XX → 4b

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

100

200

300

400

500

600 700
800
LLP decay R [cm]

0
0

mX = 80 GeV

300

Muon DTs

HCAL

ECAL

200

400

500

600 700
800
LLP decay R [cm]

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

1.2

0.6

0
0

100

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

1.2

0
0

600 700
800
LLP decay R [cm]

mH = 350 GeV

H → XX → 4b
mH = 125 GeV
mX = 25 GeV

CSCs

100

200

300

Muon DTs

300

HCAL

200

L1T+HLT acceptance

100

Tracker

0.8

H → XX → 4b

CSCs

ECAL

Muon DTs

HCAL

1.2

0.6

0
0

L1T+HLT acceptance

mX = 200 GeV

CSCs

ECAL

0.8

mH = 1000 GeV

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

Tracker

1

H → XX → 4b

L1T+HLT acceptance

1.2

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

Tracker

L1T+HLT acceptance

CMS Simulation

400

500

600 700
800
LLP decay R [cm]

Figure 61: The L1T+HLT acceptances for various LLP triggers using different subdetectors, as
functions of the LLP decay radial position, for H → XX → bbbb events for 2023 conditions.
The plots correspond to different signal models with mH = 1000 GeV and mX = 200 GeV on
the upper left; mH = 350 GeV and mX = 80 GeV on the upper right; mH = 350 GeV and
mX = 160 GeV on the lower left; and mH = 125 GeV and mX = 25 GeV on the lower right. In
each of these plots, the cτ is 0.1 m for the displaced-jet triggers using the tracker and 1 m for the
other triggers. The acceptance is shown for the displaced-jet triggers using the tracker (cyan
diamonds), for the delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing (red circles), for the displaced-jet
triggers using the HCAL (blue squares), for the MDS triggers with the DTs (green triangles),
and for the MDS triggers with the CSCs (pink triangles). The boundaries of the tracker, ECAL,
HCAL, DTs, and CSCs are also shown in the figures.

70

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

CMS Simulation

mH = 350 GeV
mX = 160 GeV

0.8

Muon DTs

CSCs

HCAL

1

H → XX → 4b

1.2

1

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

200

400

600

800
1000
1200
LLP decay Z [cm]

400

600

800
1000
1200
LLP decay Z [cm]

0
0

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

H → XX → 4b
mH = 125 GeV
mX = 25 GeV

CSCs

0.8

0.6

0
0

200

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

Tracker
ECAL

1.2

0
0

800
1000
1200
LLP decay Z [cm]

mX = 80 GeV

200

400

Muon DTs

600

HCAL

400

L1T+HLT acceptance

200

mH = 350 GeV

Muon DTs

0.8

0.6

H → XX → 4b

CSCs

HCAL

1

Tracker
ECAL

1.2

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

Tracker
ECAL

mX = 200 GeV

L1T+HLT acceptance

mH = 1000 GeV

CSCs

0.8

0
0

L1T+HLT acceptance

H → XX → 4b

Muon DTs

1

HCAL

1.2

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)

Displaced-jet using tracker (cτ = 0.1m)
Delayed-jet using ECAL timing (cτ = 1m)
Displaced-jet using HCAL (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with DTs (cτ = 1m)
Muon Detector Showers with CSCs (cτ = 1m)

Tracker
ECAL

L1T+HLT acceptance

CMS Simulation

600

800
1000
1200
LLP decay Z [cm]

Figure 62: The L1T+HLT acceptances for various LLP triggers using different subdetectors, as
functions of the z position of the LLP decay, for H → XX → bbbb events for 2023 conditions.
The plots correspond to different signal points with mH = 1000 GeV and mX = 200 GeV on
the upper left; mH = 350 GeV and mX = 80 GeV on the upper right; mH = 350 GeV and
mX = 160 GeV on the lower left; and mH = 125 GeV and mX = 25 GeV on the lower right. In
each of these plots, the cτ is 0.1 m for the displaced-jet triggers using the tracker and 1 m for the
other triggers. The acceptance is shown for the displaced-jet triggers using the tracker (cyan
diamonds), for the delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing (red circles), for the displaced-jet
triggers using the HCAL (blue squares), for the MDS triggers with the DTs (green triangles),
and for the MDS triggers with the CSCs (pink triangles). The boundaries of the tracker, ECAL,
HCAL, DTs, and CSCs are also shown in the figures.

Acceptance

0.5

CMS Simulation

0.4
0.3

(13.6 TeV)
H SS 4b
(mH, mS) = (125,40) GeV

Run 2 - pmiss
T > 200 GeV
Run 3 - L1T (CSC MDS)
Run 3 - L1T+HLT (CSC MDS)

0.35

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

H SS 4b
(mH, mS) = (125,40) GeV

0.30

Run 2 - pmiss
T > 200 GeV
Run 3 - L1T+HLT (DT MDS)

0.25
0.20

0.2

0.15
0.10

0.1
0.0 10 1

Acceptance

71

0.05
100

101

102

LLP c [m]

0.00 10 1

100

101

102

LLP c [m]

Figure 63: Comparison of the acceptances in Run 2 and Run 3 for the CSC (left) and DT (right)
MDS triggers at the L1T and HLT as functions of the LLP lifetime, for H → SS → bbbb events
with mH = 125 GeV and mS = 40 GeV, for 2023 conditions. The acceptance is defined as the
fraction of events that pass the specified selection, given an LLP decay in the fiducial region of
the CSCs (left) or the DTs (right). The left plot compares the acceptance of the Run 2 strategy
of triggering on pmiss
(blue circles), which corresponds to an offline requirement of >200 GeV,
T
with that of the Run 3 strategy of triggering on the MDS signature in the CSCs, where the L1T
(L1T+HLT) acceptance is shown with orange squares (red triangles). The right plot compares
the acceptance of the Run 2 strategy of triggering on pmiss
(blue circles) with the Run 3 strategy
T
of triggering on the MDS signature in the DTs (red triangles), for L1T+HLT.
trigger are shown in Fig. 65. In this case, there is no dedicated L1 seed, so acceptance is shown
both for all events and for those that pass the L1 pmiss
trigger. Hadronic punchthrough has a
T
smaller impact on the DT MDS trigger, owing to the lower particle flux in the barrel region
and the presence of the solenoid, which results in higher HLT acceptance in the first station
compared to that of the CSC MDS trigger.
Figures 66 and 67 show the trigger acceptance for the CSC and DT MDS triggers, respectively,
as a function of the LLP decay radial and z positions. These figures illustrate that the MDS
trigger program is comprehensive and allows CMS to trigger on the MDS signature throughout
the entire muon system.
eτ
e (τ
e → τ χe01 ) events, where each τ lepton
The acceptance of the displaced τ h trigger in pp → τ
decays hadronically, is shown in Fig. 68.
Figure 69 shows the complementarity in coverage, in the HLT muon pT -d0 plane, of the various
dimuon triggers that target displaced signatures. The displaced dimuon triggers (both L2 and
L3 muon paths), the double displaced L3 muon triggers, and the dimuon scouting triggers are
shown. The coverage of these triggers overlaps in this plane, but each trigger provides access
to additional phase space.

As explained in Section 4, while L2 muons provide higher efficiency than L3 muons for significantly displaced muons, L3 muons have a better pT resolution. To study this matter, the inverse
gen
gen
HLT muon pT resolution, that is, (1/pHLT
− 1/pT )/(1/pT ), is computed, where pHLT
is the
T
T
gen
L2 or L3 muon pT and pT is the generator-level muon pT . The generator-level muon is ge-

72

0.6

ME4

ME3

H SS 4b
mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV
c =1 m

ME2

CMS Simulation

ME1/2-3

0.8

(13.6 TeV)
ME1/1

Acceptance

1.0

L1T
L1T+HLT

Steel

0.2

Beyond CMS

0.4

0.00

200

400

600

800

1000

LLP decay Z [cm]

Figure 64: The L1T (blue circles) and L1T+HLT (orange squares) acceptances for the CSC MDS
trigger as functions of the LLP decay position in the z-direction, for H → SS → bbbb events
with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and cτS = 1 m, for 2023 conditions.

Acceptance

1.0
0.8
0.6

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation

MB1

H SS 4b
mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV
c =1 m

MB2

MB3

500

600

MB4

HLT
L1T+HLT

0.2
0.00

100

200

300

400

Beyond CMS

Steel/Solenoid

0.4

700

800

900

LLP decay R [cm]

Figure 65: The HLT (blue circles) and L1T+HLT (orange squares) acceptances for the DT MDS
trigger as functions of the LLP decay position in the radial direction, for H → SS → bbbb
events with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and cτS = 1 m, for 2023 conditions.
ometrically matched to an L2 or L3 muon. A Gaussian fit is performed for each distribution.
The standard deviation of each Gaussian distribution, along with its uncertainty, is plotted in
Fig. 70 as a function of the generator-level muon pT (left) and of the generator-level Lxy (right),
for L2 and L3 muons, in HAHM signal events. As shown in this figure, the pT resolution of L3
muons (1.5–5%, depending on the generator-level muon pT or Lxy ) is about an order of magnitude better than that of L2 muons. Both the L2 and the L3 muon pT resolution degrade as the
muon pT increases, as expected. Also, as expected, the pT resolution is relatively constant as a
function of generator Lxy for L2 muons. In contrast, for L3 muons, the pT resolution degrades
as Lxy increases, within the tracker volume, i.e., up to around 70 cm.
The signal acceptances reported in this section are highly dependent on the trigger rate allocation, which must be determined in the context of the need for a balanced physics program and
of the technical limitations of the readout bandwidth at CMS. For example, the delayed-jet triggers using ECAL timing (Section 6.3.2) employ lower pT and timing thresholds in the parked
data-taking stream with respect to the standard data-taking stream, leading to rate increases by

73

300
100

200

400

ME1/1

200
600

800

1000

LLP decay Z [cm]

600

MB3

500

MB2

400

MB1

100

200

400

ME3/2 ME4/2

0.8

0.4

200

0.0

ME2/2

0.6

Solenoid

300

0.2

ME1/3

1.0

L1T + HLT acceptance

0.4

Solenoid

MB4

600

800

ME4/1

MB1

0.6

700

ME3/1

400

0.8

CSC MDS trigger

ME2/1

500

MB2

ME3/2 ME4/2

(13.6 TeV)

ME1/2

MB3

ME2/2

800

CMS Simulation

ME1/1

600

ME1/3

ME4/1

MB4

ME3/1

700

900

LLP decay R [cm]

CSC MDS trigger

1.0

L1T acceptance

(13.6 TeV)

ME2/1

800

CMS Simulation

ME1/2

LLP decay R [cm]

900

1000

LLP decay Z [cm]

0.2
0.0

Figure 66: The L1T (left) and L1T+HLT (right) acceptances for the CSC MDS trigger as functions
of the LLP decay position, for H → SS → bbbb events with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and
cτS = 1 m, for 2023 conditions.

CMS Simulation

(13.6 TeV)

800

500

MB2

400

MB1

100

0.4

DT MDS trigger
200

400

ME1/1

200

0.8
0.6

Solenoid

300

ME3/2 ME4/2

600

800

ME4/1

MB3

ME2/2

ME3/1

600

ME1/3

ME2/1

MB4

ME1/2

700

1.0

HLT acceptance

LLP decay R [cm]

900

1000

LLP decay Z [cm]

0.2
0.0

Figure 67: The HLT acceptance for the DT MDS trigger as a function of the LLP decay position,
for H → SS → bbbb events with mH = 350 GeV, mS = 80 GeV, and cτS = 1 m, for 2023
conditions. The L1T acceptance that is based on the pmiss
trigger is not included.
T
a factor of 2–3 and acceptance increases between 35 and 800%, depending on the benchmark
signal parameters. In many cases, relaxing trigger thresholds and thus increasing the trigger
rate not only improves the acceptance for signals already passing that trigger but also expands
the phase space coverage to new regimes. For example, lowering the minimum pT thresholds
for the displaced dimuon triggers from 43 GeV (Section 6.3.2) to 3 GeV (Section 6.3.2), which is
done when going from the standard to the scouting data-taking stream, enables access to much
lower mass LLPs.

8

Long-lived particle triggers at the High-Luminosity LHC

In the next few years, many more LLP analyses using these data and the triggers presented
here will be completed. Future improvements, some potentially during Run 3, will further
increase the sensitivity of searches for LLPs. The LLP triggers presented in this paper have laid
the groundwork for these future expansions.
The HL-LHC, which is expected to begin operations in 2030, will include multiple CMS detector upgrades that will substantially enhance its performance [56, 141–147]. For example, timing
resolutions of order 10 ps will be available across multiple upgraded and new subsystems, and
there will be a new calorimeter to provide high-granularity energy and position information

74

L1T+HLT acceptance

(13.6 TeV)

CMS Simulation
∼

0.14

pp → ∼τ∼τ (∼τ → τχ0), m(∼τ) = 100 GeV, cτ = 100 mm

0.12

displaced di-τh paths

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
10−1

1

102

10

Gen.-level τ decay vertex radial positon [cm]

eτ
e (τ
e →
Figure 68: The L1T+HLT acceptance of the displaced τ h trigger, for simulated pp → τ
0
e has a simulated cτ of 10 cm. The
τ χe1 ) events, where each τ decays hadronically and the τ
acceptance is shown for the displaced di-τ h trigger path for 2022 data-taking conditions and is
plotted with respect to the generator-level τ lepton decay vertex radial position. Selections on
the visible component of the generator-level τ lepton pT (pT (τ ) > 30 GeV), its η (|η (τ )| < 2.1),
and its decay vertex radial position (R < 115 cm) are applied.

)
p(1
[GeV]
T

L2 muons (muon system only)
L3 muons (tracker + muon system)
Scouting muons (tracker + muon system)
(1,2)

43

23
16

≥2 L3 𝜇 (pT > 43 GeV)

> 23 GeV)
≥2 L2 𝜇 (p(1,2)
T
≥2 L3 𝜇 (p(1T ) > 16 GeV, p(2T) > 10 GeV,
) > 0.01 cm)
d(1,2
0
(1,2)

3

(1,2)

≥2 L2 𝜇 (pT > 10 GeV, d0

10
)
≥2 scouting 𝜇 (p(1,2
> 3 GeV)
T

0.01

1

> 1 cm)

Axis not to scale

100
(Tracker end)

1000
(Muon system end)

d0 [cm]

Figure 69: Diagram of the overlapping coverage, in the HLT muon pT -d0 plane, of the dimuon
triggers that target displaced signatures via L2 muons (shown in blue), L3 muons (shown in
red), and scouting muons (shown in green). The displaced-dimuon triggers, the double displaced L3 muon triggers, and the dimuon scouting triggers are shown. The pT of the highest
pT muon (p1T ) is shown on the y-axis, and the minimum pT thresholds on each triggered muon
(p1,2
T ) are indicated within the colored parts of the diagram. The value of 100 (1000) cm given
on the x axis for the effective end of the tracker (muon system) is approximate.

75

T

10−1

CMS Simulation

L2 muons

H → ZDZD, ZD → µµ

L3 muons

1
BPX

gen

L3 muons

gen

L2 muons

H → ZDZD, ZD → µµ

(13.6 TeV)

Fitted σ : (1/pHLT
− 1/pT ) / 1/p
T

T

1

CMS Simulation

gen

Fitted σ : (1/pHLT
− 1/pT ) / 1/p
T

gen

(13.6 TeV)

TIB

TOB

10−1

10−2

10−2

0

50

100

150

200gen

p

T

250

[GeV]

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350
gen

400

Lxy [cm]

−
Figure 70: Inverse L2 (blue circles) and L3 (red squares) muon pT resolution ((1/pHLT
T
gen
gen
1/pT )/(1/pT )) as a function of the generator-level muon pT (left) and the generator-level
Lxy (right), for simulated HAHM signal events, where the dark Higgs boson (H D ) mixes with
the SM Higgs boson (H) and decays to a pair of long-lived dark photons (Z D ), for various
values of mZ D and ϵ. Conditions for 2022 data-taking are shown. The muons must have
pT > 10 GeV, and the L2 and L3 muons are geometrically matched to the generator-level
muons. In the plot on the right, the dashed vertical lines indicate the radial positions of the
layers of the tracking detectors, with BPX, TIB, and TOB denoting the barrel pixel, tracker inner barrel, and tracker outer barrel, respectively.
in the forward region. In the L1T, tracking will be implemented, and sophisticated machinelearning algorithms will be deployed. In addition, the substantial increase in the integrated
luminosity will enable us to probe rarer processes. Together, these improvements will significantly increase the sensitivity of the CMS experiment to LLPs. This improved sensitivity is
demonstrated for the LLPs predicted by a wide range of BSM models, as shown in several
studies of the physics performance at the HL-LHC [148–150].

9

Summary

The CMS Run 3 long-lived particle (LLP) trigger program at the LHC, which includes many
dedicated triggers designed to select different LLP signatures, has been presented. These dedicated LLP triggers extend the standard CMS trigger program and provide crucial access to the
unconventional event signatures of LLPs. For 2022 data taking, some LLP triggers have been
improved, such as the tracker-based displaced-jet, displaced-muon, and dimuon-scouting triggers. Other LLP triggers, such as the displaced-tau trigger, the delayed-jet trigger using the
electromagnetic calorimeter timing, the displaced-jet trigger using the hadronic calorimeter,
and the muon detector shower trigger, were newly added in 2022. The performance of these
triggers has been shown √
for several new physics models and with 2022–2024 proton-proton
collision data collected at s = 13.6 TeV.
These triggers greatly improve the CMS sensitivity to LLPs, including those predicted by theories of physics beyond the standard model, enhancing the ability of the experiment to search
for new phenomena. At the time of writing, two CMS LLP analyses based on early Run 3 data
collected with dedicated LLP triggers have been published: a search for displaced dimuons [12]
and a search for displaced jets [11]. The Run 3 displaced
dimuon search has comparable or bet√
ter sensitivity than the previous Run 2 search at s = 13 TeV, with only 38% of the integrated
luminosity, and the Run 3 displaced jets search achieves an order-of-magnitude improvement
over the previous Run 2 results. With the improvements in trigger performance and accep-

76
tance demonstrated in this paper, future Run 3 analyses are expected to outperform previous
searches. The complementary nature of the trigger algorithms and their high signal acceptance
will play a central role in probing a substantially larger LLP parameter space.

Acknowledgments
We congratulate our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for the excellent performance of the LHC and thank the technical and administrative staffs at CERN and at other CMS
institutes for their contributions to the success of the CMS effort. In addition, we gratefully
acknowledge the computing centers and personnel of the Worldwide LHC Computing Grid
and other centers for delivering so effectively the computing infrastructure essential to our
analyses. Finally, we acknowledge the enduring support for the construction and operation
of the LHC, the CMS detector, and the supporting computing infrastructure provided by the
following funding agencies: SC (Armenia), BMBWF and FWF (Austria); FNRS and FWO (Belgium); CNPq, CAPES, FAPERJ, FAPERGS, and FAPESP (Brazil); MES and BNSF (Bulgaria);
CERN; CAS, MoST, and NSFC (China); MINCIENCIAS (Colombia); MSES and CSF (Croatia);
RIF (Cyprus); SENESCYT (Ecuador); ERC PRG, TARISTU24-TK10 and MoER TK202 (Estonia); Academy of Finland, MEC, and HIP (Finland); CEA and CNRS/IN2P3 (France); SRNSF
(Georgia); BMFTR, DFG, and HGF (Germany); GSRI (Greece); NKFIH (Hungary); DAE and
DST (India); IPM (Iran); SFI (Ireland); INFN (Italy); MSIT and NRF (Republic of Korea); MES
(Latvia); LMTLT (Lithuania); MOE and UM (Malaysia); BUAP, CINVESTAV, CONACYT, LNS,
SEP, and UASLP-FAI (Mexico); MOS (Montenegro); MBIE (New Zealand); PAEC (Pakistan);
MES, NSC, and NAWA (Poland); FCT (Portugal); MESTD (Serbia); MICIU/AEI and PCTI
(Spain); MOSTR (Sri Lanka); Swiss Funding Agencies (Switzerland); MST (Taipei); MHESI
(Thailand); TUBITAK and TENMAK (Türkiye); NASU (Ukraine); STFC (United Kingdom);
DOE and NSF (USA).
Individuals have received support from the Marie-Curie program and the European Research
Council and Horizon 2020 Grant, contract Nos. 675440, 724704, 752730, 758316, 765710, 824093,
101115353, 101002207, 101001205, and COST Action CA16108 (European Union); the Leventis
Foundation; the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation; the Science Committee, project no. 22rl-037 (Armenia); the Fonds pour la Formation à la Recherche
dans l’Industrie et dans l’Agriculture (FRIA) and Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek contract No. 1228724N (Belgium); the Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission, No.
Z191100007219010, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Ministry
of Science and Technology of China under Grant No. 2023YFA1605804, the Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 12535004, and USTC Research Funds of the Double
First-Class Initiative No. YD2030002017 (China); the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
(MEYS) of the Czech Republic; the Shota Rustaveli National Science Foundation, grant FR-22985 (Georgia); the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), among others, under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy – EXC 2121 “Quantum Universe” – 390833306, and under project number
400140256 - GRK2497; the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI), Project
Number 2288 (Greece); the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the New National Excellence Program - ÚNKP, the NKFIH research grants K 131991, K 133046, K 138136, K 143460, K 143477,
K 146913, K 146914, K 147048, 2020-2.2.1-ED-2021-00181, TKP2021-NKTA-64, and 2025-1.1.5NEMZ KI-2025-00004 (Hungary); the Council of Science and Industrial Research, India; ICSC –
National Research Center for High Performance Computing, Big Data and Quantum Computing, FAIR – Future Artificial Intelligence Research, and CUP I53D23001070006 (Mission 4 Component 1), funded by the NextGenerationEU program (Italy); the Latvian Council of Science;
the Ministry of Education and Science, project no. 2022/WK/14, and the National Science Cen-

References

77

ter, contracts Opus 2021/41/B/ST2/01369, 2021/43/B/ST2/01552, 2023/49/B/ST2/03273,
and the NAWA contract BPN/PPO/2021/1/00011 (Poland); the Fundação para a Ciência e
a Tecnologia, grant CEECIND/01334/2018 (Portugal); the National Priorities Research Program by Qatar National Research Fund; MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, ERDF/EU, “European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR”, and Programa Severo Ochoa del Principado de Asturias (Spain); the Chulalongkorn Academic into Its 2nd Century Project Advancement Project,
the National Science, Research and Innovation Fund program IND FF 68 369 2300 097, and
the Program Management Unit for Human Resources & Institutional Development, Research
and Innovation, grant B39G680009 (Thailand); the Kavli Foundation; the Nvidia Corporation;
the SuperMicro Corporation; the Welch Foundation, contract C-1845; and the Weston Havens
Foundation (USA).

References
[1] Particle Data Group, S. Navas et al., “Review of particle physics”, Phys. Rev. D 110
(2024) 030001, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.030001.
[2] J. Alimena et al., “Searching for long-lived particles beyond the standard model at the
Large Hadron Collider”, J. Phys. G 47 (2020) 090501,
doi:10.1088/1361-6471/ab4574, arXiv:1903.04497.
[3] L. Lee, C. Ohm, A. Soffer, and T.-T. Yu, “Collider searches for long-lived particles
beyond the standard model”, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 106 (2019) 210,
doi:10.1016/j.ppnp.2019.02.006, arXiv:1810.12602. [Erratum:
doi:10.1016/j.ppnp.2021.103912].
[4] D. Curtin et al., “Long-lived particles at the energy frontier: The MATHUSLA physics
case”, Rept. Prog. Phys. 82 (2019) 116201, doi:10.1088/1361-6633/ab28d6,
arXiv:1806.07396.
[5] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for displaced vertices
√ of oppositely charged leptons from
decays of long-lived particles in pp collisions at s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector”,
Phys. Lett. B 801 (2020) 135114, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2019.135114,
arXiv:1907.10037.
[6] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for heavy neutral leptons in decays of W bosons
produced in 13 TeV pp collisions using prompt and displaced signatures with the
ATLAS detector”, JHEP 10 (2019) 265, doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2019)265,
arXiv:1905.09787.
[7] LHCb Collaboration, “Search for a′ → µ+ µ− decays”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 (2020) 041801,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.041801, arXiv:1910.06926.
[8] CMS Collaboration, “Search for b hadron decays to long-lived particles in the CMS
endcap muon detectors”, Phys. Rev. D 113 (2026) 012009, doi:10.1103/7ldn-snzn,
arXiv:2508.06363.
[9] CMS Collaboration, “Search for long-lived
√ particles decaying in the CMS endcap muon
detectors in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 (2021)
261804, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.261804, arXiv:2107.04838.

78
[10] CMS Collaboration, “Search for long-lived
√ particles decaying in the CMS muon
detectors in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Rev. D 110 (2024) 032007,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.032007, arXiv:2402.01898.
[11] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for light long-lived particles decaying to displaced jets in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13.6 TeV”, Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 037801,
doi:10.1088/1361-6633/adaa13, arXiv:2409.10806.
[12] CMS Collaboration, “Search for long-lived
√ particles decaying to final states with a pair
of muons in proton-proton collisions at s = 13.6 TeV”, JHEP 05 (2024) 047,
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2024)047, arXiv:2402.14491.
[13] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for long-lived particles using delayed photons in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Rev. D 100 (2019) 112003,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.100.112003, arXiv:1909.06166.
[14] CMS Collaboration, “Search for long-lived particles using
√ nonprompt jets and missing
transverse momentum with proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Lett. B 797
(2019) 134876, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2019.134876, arXiv:1906.06441.
[15] CMS Collaboration, “Search for
√ decays of stopped exotic long-lived particles produced
in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JHEP 05 (2018) 127,
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2018)127, arXiv:1801.00359.
√
[16] ATLAS Collaboration, “A search for the decays of stopped long-lived particles at s =
13 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 07 (2021) 173,
doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2021)173, arXiv:2104.03050.
√
[17] CMS Collaboration, “Search for disappearing tracks in proton-proton collisions at s =
13 TeV”, Phys. Lett. B 806 (2020) 135502, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135502,
arXiv:2004.05153.
[18] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search
√ for long-lived charginos based on a disappearing-track
signature in pp collisions at s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 06 (2018)
022, doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2018)022, arXiv:1712.02118.
[19] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for magnetic monopoles and stable high-electric-charge
objects in 13 TeV proton-proton collisions with the ATLAS detector”, Phys. Rev. Lett.
124 (2020) 031802, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.031802, arXiv:1905.10130.
[20] CMS Collaboration, “Search for heavy long-lived
charged particles with large ionization
√
energy loss in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JHEP 04 (2025) 109,
doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2025)109, arXiv:2410.09164.
[21] CMS Collaboration, “Description and performance of track and primary-vertex
reconstruction with the CMS tracker”, JINST 9 (2014) P10009,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/9/10/P10009, arXiv:1405.6569.
[22] “HEPData record for this analysis”, 2025. doi:10.17182/hepdata.165445.
[23] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC”, JINST 3 (2008) S08004,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08004.

References

79

[24] CMS Collaboration, “Development of the CMS detector for the CERN LHC Run 3”,
JINST 19 (2024) P05064, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/19/05/P05064,
arXiv:2309.05466.
[25] CMS Collaboration,
“Performance of the CMS Level-1 trigger in proton-proton
√
collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JINST 15 (2020) P10017,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/10/P10017, arXiv:2006.10165.
[26] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS trigger system”, JINST 12 (2017) P01020,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/01/P01020, arXiv:1609.02366.
[27] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of the CMS high-level trigger during LHC Run 2”,
JINST 19 (2024) P11021, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/19/11/P11021,
arXiv:2410.17038.
[28] CMS Collaboration, “Electron and photon reconstruction and identification with the
CMS experiment at the CERN LHC”, JINST 16 (2021) P05014,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/05/P05014, arXiv:2012.06888.
[29] CMS Collaboration, “Performance
√ of the CMS muon detector and muon reconstruction
with proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JINST 13 (2018) P06015,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/13/06/P06015, arXiv:1804.04528.
[30] CMS
√ Collaboration, “Precision luminosity measurement in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV in 2015 and 2016 at CMS”, Eur. Phys. J. C 81 (2021) 800,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09538-2, arXiv:2104.01927.
[31] CMS
√ Collaboration, “CMS luminosity measurement for the 2017 data-taking period at
s = 13 TeV”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-LUM-17-004, 2018.
[32] CMS
√ Collaboration, “CMS luminosity measurement for the 2018 data-taking period at
s = 13 TeV”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-LUM-18-002, 2019.
[33] CMS Collaboration, “Luminosity measurement in proton-proton collisions at 13.6 TeV
in 2022 at CMS”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-LUM-22-001, 2024.
[34] Tracker Group of the CMS Collaboration, “The CMS phase-1 pixel detector upgrade”,
JINST 16 (2021) P02027, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/02/P02027,
arXiv:2012.14304.
[35] CMS Collaboration, “Track impact parameter resolution for the full pseudo rapidity
coverage in the 2017 dataset with the CMS phase-1 pixel detector”, CMS Detector
Performance Summary CMS-DP-2020-049, 2020.
[36] CMS Collaboration, “Time reconstruction and performance of the CMS electromagnetic
calorimeter”, JINST 5 (2010) T03011, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/5/03/T03011,
arXiv:0911.4044.
[37] CMS Collaboration,
“Performance of the CMS electromagnetic calorimeter in pp
√
collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JINST 19 (2024) P09004,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/19/09/P09004, arXiv:2403.15518.
[38] CMS Collaboration, “CMS technical design report for the Phase 1 upgrade of the hadron
calorimeter”, CMS Technical Proposal CERN-LHCC-2012-015, CMS-TDR-010, 2012.
doi:10.2172/1151651.

80
[39] CMS Collaboration, “Measurements with silicon photomultipliers of dose-rate effects in
the radiation damage of plastic scintillator tiles in the CMS hadron endcap calorimeter”,
JINST 15 (2020) P06009, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/06/P06009,
arXiv:2001.06553.
[40] CMS Collaboration, “Jet energy scale and resolution in the CMS experiment in pp
collisions at 8 TeV”, JINST 12 (2017) P02014,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/02/P02014, arXiv:1607.03663.
[41] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase 2 upgrade of the CMS muon detectors”, CMS Technical
Proposal CERN-LHCC-2017-012, CMS-TDR-016, 2017.
[42] CMS Collaboration, “CMS technical design report for the Level-1 trigger upgrade”,
CMS Technical Proposal CERN-LHCC-2013-011, CMS-TDR-012, 2013.
[43] J. Duarte et al., “Fast inference of deep neural networks in FPGAs for particle physics”,
JINST 13 (2018) P07027, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/13/07/P07027,
arXiv:1804.06913.
[44] CMS Collaboration, “Using the CMS threaded framework in a production
environment”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 664 (2015) 072026,
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/664/7/072026.
[45] CMS Collaboration, “Enriching the physics program of the CMS experiment via data
scouting and data parking”, Phys. Rept. 1115 (2025) 678,
doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2024.09.006, arXiv:2403.16134.
[46] A. Bocci et al., “Heterogeneous reconstruction of tracks and primary vertices with the
CMS pixel tracker”, Front. Big Data 3 (2020) 601728,
doi:10.3389/fdata.2020.601728, arXiv:2008.13461.
[47] CMS Collaboration, “Developing GPU-compliant algorithms for CMS ECAL local
reconstruction during LHC Run 3 and Phase 2”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2438 (2023) 012027,
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/2438/1/012027.
[48] CMS Collaboration, “Heterogeneous computing for the local reconstruction algorithms
of the CMS calorimeters”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1525 (2020) 012040,
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1525/1/012040.
[49] CMS Collaboration, “2024 HLT timing and throughput results”, CMS Detector
Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-082; CERN-CMS-DP-2024-082, 2024.
[50] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of Run 3 HLT track reconstruction”, CMS Detector
Performance Summary CMS-DP-2022-014; CERN-CMS-DP-2022-014, 2022.
[51] S. Lantz et al., “Speeding up particle track reconstruction using a parallel Kalman filter
algorithm”, JINST 15 (2020) P09030, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/09/P09030,
arXiv:2006.00071.
[52] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of Run 3 track reconstruction with the mkFit
algorithm”, CMS Detector Performance Summary CCMS-DP-2022-018, 2022.
[53] E. Bols et al., “Jet flavour classification using DeepJet”, JINST 15 (2020) P12012,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/12/P12012, arXiv:2008.10519.

References

81

[54] H. Qu and L. Gouskos, “ParticleNet: Jet tagging via particle clouds”, Phys. Rev. D 101
(2020) 056019, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.101.056019, arXiv:1902.08570.
[55] CMS Collaboration, “Particle-flow reconstruction and global event description with the
CMS detector”, JINST 12 (2017) P10003, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/10/P10003,
arXiv:1706.04965.
[56] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 upgrade of the CMS Level-1 trigger”, CMS Technical
Design Report CERN-LHCC-2020-004, CMS-TDR-021, 2020.
[57] CMS Collaboration, “The Level 1 scouting system of the CMS experiment”, CMS
Conference Report CMS-CR-2023-024, 2023.
[58] CMS Collaboration, “Technical proposal for the Phase-II upgrade of the Compact Muon
Solenoid”, CMS Technical Proposal CERN-LHCC-2015-010, CMS-TDR-15-02, 2015.
[59] R. Frühwirth, “Application of Kalman filtering to track and vertex fitting”, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A 262 (1987) 444, doi:10.1016/0168-9002(87)90887-4.
[60] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of track reconstruction at the CMS High-Level
Trigger in 2022 data”, CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2023-028;
CERN-CMS-DP-2023-028, 2023.
[61] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of track reconstruction at the CMS high-level trigger
in 2023 data”, CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-013,
CERN-CMS-DP-2024-013, 2024.
[62] K. Rose, “Deterministic annealing for clustering, compression, classification, regression,
and related optimization problems”, IEEE Proc. 86 (1998) 2210,
doi:10.1109/5.726788.
[63] R. Frühwirth, W. Waltenberger, and P. Vanlaer, “Adaptive vertex fitting”, J. Phys. G 34
(2007) N343, doi:10.1088/0954-3899/34/12/N01.
[64] CMS
√ Collaboration, “Performance of CMS muon reconstruction in pp collision events at
s = 7 TeV”, JINST 7 (2012) P10002, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/7/10/P10002,
arXiv:1206.4071.
[65] CMS Collaboration, “Identification of low-momentum muons
√ in the CMS detector
using multivariate techniques in proton-proton collisions at s = 13.6 TeV”, JINST 20
(2025) P04021, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/20/04/P04021, arXiv:2412.17590.
[66] CMS Collaboration,
“Performance of the CMS muon trigger system in proton-proton
√
collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JINST 16 (2021) P07001,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/07/P07001, arXiv:2102.04790.
[67] W. Adam, R. Frühwirth, A. Strandlie, and T. Todorov, “Reconstruction of electrons with
the Gaussian-sum filter in the CMS tracker at LHC”, J. Phys. G 31 (2005) N9,
doi:10.1088/0954-3899/31/9/N01, arXiv:physics/0306087.
[68] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of photon√reconstruction and identification with the
CMS detector in proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV”, JINST 10 (2015) P08010,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/10/08/P08010, arXiv:1502.02702.

82
[69] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of electron
√reconstruction and selection with the
CMS detector in proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV”, JINST 10 (2015) P06005,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/10/06/P06005, arXiv:1502.02701.
[70] CMS Collaboration, “ECAL 2016 refined calibration and Run 2 summary plots”, CMS
Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2020-021, 2020.
[71] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, “The anti-kT jet clustering algorithm”, JHEP 04
(2008) 063, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2008/04/063, arXiv:0802.1189.
[72] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, “FastJet user manual”, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012)
1896, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1896-2, arXiv:1111.6097.
[73] CMS Collaboration, “Pileup mitigation at CMS in 13 TeV data”, JINST 15 (2020)
P09018, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/09/p09018, arXiv:2003.00503.
[74] D. Bertolini, P. Harris, M. Low, and N. Tran, “Pileup per particle identification”, JHEP
10 (2014) 059, doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2014)059, arXiv:1407.6013.
[75] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of reconstruction
and identification of τ leptons
√
decaying to hadrons and ντ in pp collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JINST 13 (2018) P10005,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/13/10/P10005, arXiv:1809.02816.
[76] CMS Collaboration, “Identification of hadronic tau lepton decays using a deep neural
network”, JINST 17 (2022) P07023, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/17/07/P07023,
arXiv:2201.08458.
[77] CMS Collaboration, “Performance
of missing transverse momentum reconstruction in
√
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV using the CMS detector”, JINST 14 (2019)
P07004, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/14/07/P07004, arXiv:1903.06078.
[78] J. Alwall et al., “The automated computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order
differential cross sections, and their matching to parton shower simulations”, JHEP 07
(2014) 079, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2014)079, arXiv:1405.0301.
[79] C. Bierlich et al., “A comprehensive guide to the physics and usage of PYTHIA 8.3”,
SciPost Phys. Codeb. 2022 (2022) 8, doi:10.21468/SciPostPhysCodeb.8,
arXiv:2203.11601.
[80] J. Alwall et al., “Comparative study of various algorithms for the merging of parton
showers and matrix elements in hadronic collisions”, Eur. Phys. J. C 53 (2008) 473,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-007-0490-5, arXiv:0706.2569.
[81] R. Frederix and S. Frixione, “Merging meets matching in MC@NLO”, JHEP 12 (2012)
061, doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2012)061, arXiv:1209.6215.
[82] NNPDF Collaboration, “Parton distributions from high-precision collider data”, Eur.
Phys. J. C 77 (2017) 663, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-5199-5,
arXiv:1706.00428.
[83] CMS Collaboration, “Extraction and validation of a new set of CMS PYTHIA8 tunes
from underlying-event measurements”, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 4,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-7499-4, arXiv:1903.12179.

References

83

[84] GEANT4 Collaboration, “G EANT 4—a simulation toolkit”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506
(2003) 250, doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(03)01368-8.
[85] G. F. Giudice, M. A. Luty, H. Murayama, and R. Rattazzi, “Gaugino mass without
singlets”, JHEP 12 (1998) 027, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/1998/12/027,
arXiv:hep-ph/9810442.
[86] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “Out of this world supersymmetry breaking”, Nucl. Phys. B
557 (1999) 79, doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(99)00359-4, arXiv:hep-th/9810155.
[87] Z. Chacko, H.-S. Goh, and R. Harnik, “The twin Higgs: Natural electroweak breaking
from mirror symmetry”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 231802,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.231802, arXiv:hep-ph/0506256.
[88] D. Curtin and C. B. Verhaaren, “Discovering uncolored naturalness in exotic Higgs
decays”, JHEP 12 (2015) 072, doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2015)072,
arXiv:1506.06141.
[89] H.-C. Cheng, S. Jung, E. Salvioni, and Y. Tsai, “Exotic quarks in twin Higgs models”,
JHEP 03 (2016) 074, doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2016)074, arXiv:1512.02647.
[90] D. Curtin, R. Essig, S. Gori, and J. Shelton, “Illuminating dark photons with high-energy
colliders”, JHEP 02 (2015) 157, doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2015)157,
arXiv:1412.0018.
[91] B. C. Allanach et al., “The Snowmass points and slopes: Benchmarks for SUSY
searches”, Eur. Phys. J. C 25 (2002) 113, doi:10.1007/s10052-002-0949-3,
arXiv:hep-ph/0202233.
[92] F. Blekman et al., “Soft displaced leptons at the LHC”, JHEP 11 (2020) 112,
doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2020)112, arXiv:2007.03708.
[93] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of long lived particle triggers in Run 3”, CMS
Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2023-043, 2023.
[94] CMS Collaboration, “Level-1 trigger algorithm for long-lived particle jets in Run 3”,
CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-058, 2024.
[95] CMS Collaboration, “CSC high multiplicity trigger in Run 3”, CMS Detector
Performance Summary CMS-DP-2022-062, CERN-CMS-DP-2022-062, 2022.
[96] CMS Collaboration, “High multiplicity trigger for long-lived particles in CMS detector
in 2022 and 2023”, CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-099,
CERN-CMS-DP-2024-099, 2024.
[97] CMS Collaboration, “Displaced photons HLT trigger on 2017 data at 13 TeV”, CMS
Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2020-015; CERN-CMS-DP-2020-015, 2020.
[98] CMS Collaboration, “A DNN for CMS track classification and selection”, EPJ Web Conf.
295 (2024) 03001, doi:10.1051/epjconf/202429503001, arXiv:2311.05157.
[99] M. Buican, P. Meade, N. Seiberg, and D. Shih, “Exploring general gauge mediation”,
JHEP 03 (2009) 016, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/03/016, arXiv:0812.3668.
[100] P. Meade, N. Seiberg, and D. Shih, “General gauge mediation”, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.
177 (2009) 143, doi:10.1143/PTPS.177.143, arXiv:0801.3278.

84
[101] G. F. Giudice and R. Rattazzi, “Theories with gauge mediated supersymmetry
breaking”, Phys. Rept. 322 (1999) 419, doi:10.1016/S0370-1573(99)00042-3,
arXiv:hep-ph/9801271.
[102] CMS Collaboration, “Search for direct pair production of supersymmetric partners of τ
leptons in the final state with two hadronically decaying
√ τ leptons and missing
transverse momentum in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Rev. D 108
(2023) 012011, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.108.012011, arXiv:2207.02254.
[103] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for long-lived particles using displaced jets in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Phys. Rev. D 104 (2021) 012015,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.104.012015, arXiv:2012.01581.
[104] N. Arkani-Hamed and S. Dimopoulos, “Supersymmetric unification without low
energy supersymmetry and signatures for fine-tuning at the LHC”, JHEP 06 (2005) 073,
doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/06/073, arXiv:hep-th/0405159.
[105] G. F. Giudice and A. Romanino, “Split supersymmetry”, Nucl. Phys. B 699 (2004) 65,
doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2004.08.001, arXiv:hep-ph/0406088. [Erratum:
doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2004.11.048].
[106] J. L. Hewett, B. Lillie, M. Masip, and T. G. Rizzo, “Signatures of long-lived gluinos in
split supersymmetry”, JHEP 09 (2004) 070,
doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2004/09/070, arXiv:hep-ph/0408248.
[107] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G. F. Giudice, and A. Romanino, “Aspects of split
supersymmetry”, Nucl. Phys. B 709 (2005) 3,
doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2004.12.026, arXiv:hep-ph/0409232.
[108] P. Gambino, G. F. Giudice, and P. Slavich, “Gluino decays in split supersymmetry”,
Nucl. Phys. B 726 (2005) 35, doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2005.08.011,
arXiv:hep-ph/0506214.
[109] A. Arvanitaki, N. Craig, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Villadoro, “Mini-split”, JHEP 02 (2013)
126, doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2013)126, arXiv:1210.0555.
[110] N. Arkani-Hamed et al., “Simply unnatural supersymmetry”, 2012.
arXiv:1212.6971.
[111] P. Fayet, “Supergauge invariant extension of the Higgs mechanism and a model for the
electron and its neutrino”, Nucl. Phys. B 90 (1975) 104,
doi:10.1016/0550-3213(75)90636-7.
[112] G. R. Farrar and P. Fayet, “Phenomenology of the production, decay, and detection of
new hadronic states associated with supersymmetry”, Phys. Lett. B 76 (1978) 575,
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(78)90858-4.
[113] S. Weinberg, “Supersymmetry at ordinary energies: 1. Masses and conservation laws”,
Phys. Rev. D 26 (1982) 287, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.26.287.
[114] L. J. Hall and M. Suzuki, “Explicit R-parity breaking in supersymmetric models”, Nucl.
Phys. B 231 (1984) 419, doi:10.1016/0550-3213(84)90513-3.
[115] R. Barbier et al., “R-parity violating supersymmetry”, Phys. Rept. 420 (2005) 1,
doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2005.08.006, arXiv:hep-ph/0406039.

References

85

[116] C. Csaki, E. Kuflik, and T. Volansky, “Dynamical R-parity violation”, Phys. Rev. Lett.
112 (2014) 131801, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.131801, arXiv:1309.5957.
[117] C. Csaki, E. Kuflik, O. Slone, and T. Volansky, “Models of dynamical R-parity violation”,
JHEP 06 (2015) 045, doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2015)045, arXiv:1502.03096.
√
[118] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for light long-lived particles in pp collisions at s = 13
TeV using displaced vertices in the ATLAS inner detector”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 133 (2024)
161803, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.161803, arXiv:2403.15332.
[119] CMS Collaboration, “A novel timing trigger with the CMS hadron calorimeter”, CMS
Detector Performance Summary CERN-CMS-DN-2023-022, 2023.
[120] M. J. Strassler and K. M. Zurek, “Echoes of a hidden valley at hadron colliders”, Phys.
Lett. B 651 (2007) 374, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2007.06.055,
arXiv:hep-ph/0604261.
[121] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS electromagnetic calorimeter project: Technical Design
Report”, CMS Technical Design Report CERN-LHCC-97-033, CMS-TDR-4, 1997.
[122] CMS Collaboration,
√ “Measurement of the inclusive W and Z production cross sections
in pp collisions at s = 7 TeV”, JHEP 10 (2011) 132,
doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2011)132, arXiv:1107.4789.
[123] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for long-lived particles decaying to a pair of muons in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, JHEP 05 (2023) 228,
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2023)228, arXiv:2205.08582.
[124] CMS Collaboration, “The algorithm of the CMS Level-1 overlap muon track finder
trigger”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 936 (2019) 368,
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2018.10.173.
[125] CMS Collaboration, “Boosted decision trees in the Level-1 muon endcap trigger at
CMS”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1085 (2018) 042042,
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1085/4/042042.
[126] J. Alwall, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “Simplified models for a first characterization of new
physics at the LHC”, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 075020,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.79.075020, arXiv:0810.3921.
[127] CMS Collaboration, “Search for long-lived particles
√ decaying to leptons with large
impact parameter in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 82 (2022)
153, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-022-10027-3, arXiv:2110.04809.
[128] P. W. Graham, D. E. Kaplan, S. Rajendran, and P. Saraswat, “Displaced supersymmetry”,
JHEP 07 (2012) 149, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2012)149, arXiv:1204.6038.
[129] J. A. Evans and J. Shelton, “Long-lived staus and displaced leptons at the LHC”, JHEP
04 (2016) 056, doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2016)056, arXiv:1601.01326.
[130] M. J. Strassler and K. M. Zurek, “Discovering the Higgs through highly-displaced
vertices”, Phys. Lett. B 661 (2008) 263, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2008.02.008,
arXiv:hep-ph/0605193.

86
[131] CMS Collaboration, “Dark sector searches with the CMS experiment”, Phys. Rept. 1115
(2025) 448, doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2024.09.013, arXiv:2405.13778.
[132] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for long-lived particles decaying into muon pairs in
proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV collected with a dedicated high-rate data
stream”, JHEP 04 (2022) 062, doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2022)062,
arXiv:2112.13769.
[133] Y. L. Dokshitzer, G. D. Leder, S. Moretti, and B. R. Webber, “Better jet clustering
algorithms”, JHEP 08 (1997) 001, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/1997/08/001,
arXiv:hep-ph/9707323.
[134] M. Wobisch and T. Wengler, “Hadronization corrections to jet cross-sections in deep
inelastic scattering”, in Proc. Workshop on Monte Carlo Generators for HERA Physics
(Plenary Starting Meeting). 1998. arXiv:hep-ph/9907280.
[135] R. Bailey and P. Collier, “Standard filling schemes for various LHC operation modes”,
Technical Report LHC-PROJECT-NOTE-323, 2003.
[136] CMS Collaboration, “Search√for decays of stopped long-lived particles produced in
proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 151,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3367-z, arXiv:1501.05603.
[137] D. Abercrombie et al., “Dark matter benchmark models for early LHC Run 2 searches:
Report of the ATLAS/CMS dark matter forum”, Phys. Dark Univ. 27 (2020) 100371,
doi:10.1016/j.dark.2019.100371, arXiv:1507.00966.
[138] L. M. Carpenter, R. Colburn, J. Goodman, and T. Linden, “Indirect detection constraints
on s and t channel simplified models of dark matter”, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 055027,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.94.055027, arXiv:1606.04138.
[139] L. Covi and F. Dradi, “Long-lived stop at the LHC with or without R-parity”, JCAP 10
(2014) 039, doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2014/10/039, arXiv:1403.4923.
[140] P. Langacker and G. Steigman, “Requiem for a fractionally charged, massive particle”,
Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 065040, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.065040,
arXiv:1107.3131.
[141] CMS Collaboration, “Technical proposal for the Phase-II upgrade of the CMS detector”,
CMS Technical Proposal CERN-LHCC-2015-010, LHCC-P-008, CMS-TDR-15-02, 2015.
doi:10.17181/CERN.VU8I.D59J.
[142] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 upgrade of the CMS tracker”, CMS Technical Design
Report CERN-LHCC-2017-009, CMS-TDR-014, 2017.
doi:10.17181/CERN.QZ28.FLHW.
[143] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 upgrade of the CMS barrel calorimeters”, CMS
Technical Design Report CERN-LHCC-2017-011, CMS-TDR-015, 2017.
[144] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 upgrade of the CMS endcap calorimeter”, CMS
Technical Design Report CERN-LHCC-2017-023, CMS-TDR-019, 2017.
doi:10.17181/CERN.IV8M.1JY2.
[145] CMS Collaboration, “The Phase-2 upgrade of the CMS muon detectors”, CMS Technical
Design Report CERN-LHCC-2017-012, CMS-TDR-016, 2017.

References

87

[146] CMS Collaboration, “A MIP timing detector for the CMS Phase-2 upgrade”, CMS
Technical Design Report CERN-LHCC-2019-003, CMS-TDR-020, 2019.
[147] CMS Collaboration, “Update of the MTD physics case”, CMS Detector Performance
Summary CMS-DP-2022-025, 2022.
[148] CMS Collaboration, “Snowmass white paper contribution: Physics with the Phase-2
ATLAS and CMS detectors”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-FTR-22-001,
2022.
[149] A. Dainese et al., eds., “Report on the physics at the HL-LHC, and perspectives for the
HE-LHC”, volume 7/2019 of CERN Yellow Reports: Monographs. CERN, 2019.
doi:10.23731/CYRM-2019-007, ISBN 978-92-9083-549-3.
[150] CMS Collaboration, “Search for dark matter in final states with a Higgs boson decaying
to a pair of b jets and missing transverse momentum at the HL-LHC”, CMS Physics
Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-FTR-22-005, 2022.

88

A

Glossary of acronyms

3D
AMSB
BMTF
BPTX
BSM
BX
CMS
CSC
CPU
DT
ECAL
EMTF
FPGA
GEM
GMSB
GPU
HAHM
HCAL
HB
HL-LHC
HLT
HPS
IP
ISR
L1
L1T
LHC
LLP
LO
MDS
NHEF
NLO
NN
OMTF
PDF
PF
PU
PUPPI
PV
QCD
RPC
SM
STA
SUSY
TDC
TMS

Three-dimensional
Anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking
Barrel muon track finder
Beam pickup timing device
Beyond the standard model
Bunch slot
Compact Muon Solenoid
Cathode strip chamber
Central processing unit
Drift tube
Electromagnetic calorimeter
Endcap muon track finder
Field-programmable gate array
Gas electron multiplier
Gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking
Graphical processing unit
Hidden Abelian Higgs model
Hadronic calorimeter
Hadronic calorimeter barrel
High-Luminosity LHC
High level trigger
Hadron plus strip
Interaction point
Initial state radiation
First level
First level trigger
Large Hadron Collider
Long-lived particle
Leading order
Muon detector shower
Neutral hadron energy fraction
Next-to-leading order
Neural network
Overlap muon track finder
Parton distribution function
Particle flow
Pileup
Pileup per particle identification
Primary vertex
Quantum chromodynamics
Resistive-plate chamber
Standard model
Muons reconstructed using only the muon system (standalone)
Supersymmetry
Time-to-digital converter
Muons reconstructed using both the tracker and the muon system

89

A

The CMS Collaboration

Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
A. Hayrapetyan, V. Makarenko , A. Tumasyan1
Institut für Hochenergiephysik, Vienna, Austria
W. Adam , J.W. Andrejkovic, L. Benato , T. Bergauer , M. Dragicevic , C. Giordano,
P.S. Hussain , M. Jeitler2 , N. Krammer , A. Li , D. Liko , M. Matthewman,
I. Mikulec , J. Schieck2 , R. Schöfbeck2 , D. Schwarz , M. Shooshtari , M. Sonawane ,
W. Waltenberger , C.-E. Wulz2
Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium
T. Janssen , H. Kwon , D. Ocampo Henao , T. Van Laer

, P. Van Mechelen

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
J. Bierkens , N. Breugelmans, J. D’Hondt , S. Dansana , A. De Moor , M. Delcourt
F. Heyen, Y. Hong , P. Kashko , S. Lowette , I. Makarenko , D. Müller , J. Song
S. Tavernier , M. Tytgat3 , G.P. Van Onsem , S. Van Putte , D. Vannerom

,
,

Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium
B. Bilin , B. Clerbaux , A.K. Das, I. De Bruyn , G. De Lentdecker , H. Evard ,
L. Favart , P. Gianneios , A. Khalilzadeh, F.A. Khan , A. Malara , M.A. Shahzad,
A. Sharma , L. Thomas , M. Vanden Bemden , C. Vander Velde , P. Vanlaer ,
F. Zhang
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
M. De Coen , D. Dobur , G. Gokbulut , J. Knolle , D. Marckx
A.M. Tomaru, N. Van Den Bossche , J. van der Linden , J. Vandenbroeck

, K. Skovpen ,
, L. Wezenbeek

Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
H. Aarup Petersen , S. Bein , A. Benecke , A. Bethani , G. Bruno , A. Cappati
J. De Favereau De Jeneret , C. Delaere , F. Gameiro Casalinho , A. Giammanco
A.O. Guzel , V. Lemaitre, J. Lidrych , P. Malek , P. Mastrapasqua , S. Turkcapar

,
,

Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
G.A. Alves ,
M. Barroso Ferreira Filho ,
E. Coelho ,
T. Menezes De Oliveira , C. Mora Herrera , P. Rebello Teles
E.J. Tonelli Manganote4 , A. Vilela Pereira5

C. Hensel
, M. Soeiro

,
,

Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
W.L. Aldá Júnior , H. Brandao Malbouisson , W. Carvalho , J. Chinellato6
M. Costa Reis , E.M. Da Costa , G.G. Da Silveira7 , D. De Jesus Damiao
S. Fonseca De Souza , R. Gomes De Souza , S. S. Jesus , T. Laux Kuhn7 , M. Macedo
K. Mota Amarilo , L. Mundim , H. Nogima , J.P. Pinheiro , A. Santoro , A. Sznajder
M. Thiel , F. Torres Da Silva De Araujo8

,
,
,
,

Universidade Estadual Paulista, Universidade Federal do ABC, São Paulo, Brazil
C.A. Bernardes7 , F. Damas , T.R. Fernandez Perez Tomei , E.M. Gregores
B. Lopes Da Costa , I. Maietto Silverio , P.G. Mercadante , S.F. Novaes , B. Orzari
Sandra S. Padula , V. Scheurer

,
,

Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia,
Bulgaria
A. Aleksandrov , G. Antchev , P. Danev, R. Hadjiiska , P. Iaydjiev , M. Shopova ,
G. Sultanov

90
University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria
A. Dimitrov , L. Litov , B. Pavlov

, P. Petkov

, A. Petrov

Instituto De Alta Investigación, Universidad de Tarapacá, Casilla 7 D, Arica, Chile
S. Keshri , D. Laroze , S. Thakur
Universidad Tecnica Federico Santa Maria, Valparaiso, Chile
W. Brooks
Beihang University, Beijing, China
T. Cheng , T. Javaid , L. Wang , L. Yuan
Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Z. Hu , Z. Liang, J. Liu, X. Wang , H. Yang
Institute of High Energy Physics, Beijing, China
G.M. Chen9 , H.S. Chen9 , M. Chen9 , Y. Chen , Q. Hou , X. Hou, F. Iemmi
C.H. Jiang, A. Kapoor10 , H. Liao , G. Liu , Z.-A. Liu11 , J.N. Song11 , S. Song, J. Tao
C. Wang9 , J. Wang , H. Zhang , J. Zhao

,
,

State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
A. Agapitos , Y. Ban , A. Carvalho Antunes De Oliveira , S. Deng , B. Guo, Q. Guo,
C. Jiang , A. Levin , C. Li , Q. Li , Y. Mao, S. Qian, S.J. Qian , X. Qin, C. Quaranta ,
X. Sun , D. Wang , J. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Institute of Quantum Matter,
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China
S. Yang
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
Z. You
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
K. Jaffel , N. Lu
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
G. Bauer12,13 , Z. Cui13 , B. Li14 , H. Wang , K. Yi15

, J. Zhang

Institute of Modern Physics and Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Ion-beam
Application (MOE) - Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Y. Li, Y. Zhou16
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Z. Lin , C. Lu , M. Xiao17
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota, Colombia
C. Avila , D.A. Barbosa Trujillo , A. Cabrera

, C. Florez

Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia
C. Rendón , M. Rodriguez , A.A. Ruales Barbosa

, J. Fraga

, J.A. Reyes Vega

, J.D. Ruiz Alvarez

University of Split, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Naval
Architecture, Split, Croatia
N. Godinovic , D. Lelas , A. Sculac
University of Split, Faculty of Science, Split, Croatia
M. Kovac , A. Petkovic , T. Sculac

91
Institute Rudjer Boskovic, Zagreb, Croatia
P. Bargassa , V. Brigljevic , B.K. Chitroda
T. Susa

, D. Ferencek

, K. Jakovcic, A. Starodumov

University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
A. Attikis , K. Christoforou , C. Leonidou , C. Nicolaou, L. Paizanos
P.A. Razis , H. Rykaczewski, H. Saka , A. Stepennov

, F. Ptochos

,

,

Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
M. Finger† , M. Finger Jr.
Escuela Politecnica Nacional, Quito, Ecuador
E. Ayala
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
E. Carrera Jarrin
Academy of Scientific Research and Technology of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Egyptian
Network of High Energy Physics, Cairo, Egypt
S. Khalil18 , E. Salama19,20
Center for High Energy Physics (CHEP-FU), Fayoum University, El-Fayoum, Egypt
A. Hussein , H. Mohammed
National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia
M. Kadastik, T. Lange , C. Nielsen , J. Pata , M. Raidal , N. Seeba , L. Tani
Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
E. Brücken , A. Milieva , K. Osterberg , M. Voutilainen
Helsinki Institute of Physics, Helsinki, Finland
F. Garcia , P. Inkaew , K.T.S. Kallonen , R. Kumar Verma , T. Lampén , K. LassilaPerini , B. Lehtela , S. Lehti , T. Lindén , N.R. Mancilla Xinto , M. Myllymäki ,
M.m. Rantanen , S. Saariokari , N.T. Toikka , J. Tuominiemi
Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Lappeenranta, Finland
N. Bin Norjoharuddeen , H. Kirschenmann , P. Luukka , H. Petrow
IRFU, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
M. Besancon , F. Couderc , M. Dejardin , D. Denegri, P. Devouge, J.L. Faure , F. Ferri
P. Gaigne, S. Ganjour , P. Gras , G. Hamel de Monchenault , M. Kumar , V. Lohezic
Y. Maidannyk , J. Malcles , F. Orlandi , L. Portales , S. Ronchi , M.Ö. Sahin
A. Savoy-Navarro21 , P. Simkina , M. Titov , M. Tornago

,
,
,

Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet, CNRS/IN2P3, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, Palaiseau, France
R. Amella Ranz , F. Beaudette , G. Boldrini , P. Busson , C. Charlot , M. Chiusi ,
T.D. Cuisset , O. Davignon , A. De Wit , T. Debnath , I.T. Ehle , S. Ghosh ,
A. Gilbert , R. Granier de Cassagnac , L. Kalipoliti , M. Manoni , M. Nguyen ,
S. Obraztsov , C. Ochando , R. Salerno , J.B. Sauvan , Y. Sirois , G. Sokmen,
L. Urda Gómez , A. Zabi , A. Zghiche
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France
J.-L. Agram22 , J. Andrea , D. Bloch , J.-M. Brom , E.C. Chabert
G. Coulon, S. Falke , U. Goerlach , R. Haeberle , A.-C. Le Bihan
O. Poncet , G. Saha , P. Vaucelle

, C. Collard
, M. Meena

,
,

92
Centre de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucleaire et de Physique des Particules,
CNRS/IN2P3, Villeurbanne, France
A. Di Florio
Institut de Physique des 2 Infinis de Lyon (IP2I ), Villeurbanne, France
D. Amram, S. Beauceron , B. Blancon , G. Boudoul , N. Chanon , D. Contardo ,
P. Depasse , H. El Mamouni, J. Fay , S. Gascon , M. Gouzevitch , C. Greenberg ,
G. Grenier , B. Ille , E. Jourd’Huy, M. Lethuillier , B. Massoteau , L. Mirabito,
A. Purohit , M. Vander Donckt , J. Xiao
Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
I. Bagaturia23 , I. Lomidze , Z. Tsamalaidze24
RWTH Aachen University, I. Physikalisches Institut, Aachen, Germany
V. Botta , S. Consuegra Rodrı́guez , L. Feld , K. Klein , M. Lipinski , D. Meuser
P. Nattland , V. Oppenländer, A. Pauls , D. Pérez Adán , N. Röwert , M. Teroerde

,

RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
C. Daumann, S. Diekmann , A. Dodonova , N. Eich , D. Eliseev , F. Engelke
J. Erdmann , M. Erdmann , B. Fischer , T. Hebbeker , K. Hoepfner , F. Ivone
A. Jung , N. Kumar , M.y. Lee , F. Mausolf , M. Merschmeyer , A. Meyer
F. Nowotny, A. Pozdnyakov , W. Redjeb , H. Reithler , U. Sarkar , V. Sarkisovi
A. Schmidt , C. Seth, A. Sharma , J.L. Spah , V. Vaulin, S. Zaleski

,
,
,
,

RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut B, Aachen, Germany
M.R. Beckers , C. Dziwok , G. Flügge , N. Hoeflich , T. Kress , A. Nowack
O. Pooth , A. Stahl , A. Zotz

,

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
A. Abel, M. Aldaya Martin , J. Alimena , S. Amoroso, Y. An , I. Andreev , J. Bach
S. Baxter , M. Bayatmakou , H. Becerril Gonzalez , O. Behnke , A. Belvedere
F. Blekman25 , K. Borras26 , A. Campbell , S. Chatterjee , L.X. Coll Saravia
G. Eckerlin, D. Eckstein , E. Gallo25 , A. Geiser , V. Guglielmi , M. Guthoff
A. Hinzmann , L. Jeppe , M. Kasemann , C. Kleinwort , R. Kogler , M. Komm
D. Krücker , W. Lange, D. Leyva Pernia , K.-Y. Lin , K. Lipka27 , W. Lohmann28
J. Malvaso , R. Mankel , I.-A. Melzer-Pellmann , M. Mendizabal Morentin
A.B. Meyer , G. Milella , K. Moral Figueroa , A. Mussgiller , L.P. Nair , J. Niedziela
A. Nürnberg , J. Park , E. Ranken , A. Raspereza , D. Rastorguev , L. Rygaard
M. Scham29,26 , S. Schnake26 , P. Schütze , C. Schwanenberger25 , D. Selivanova
K. Sharko , M. Shchedrolosiev , D. Stafford , M. Torkian, A. Ventura Barroso
R. Walsh , D. Wang , Q. Wang , K. Wichmann, L. Wiens26 , C. Wissing , Y. Yang
S. Zakharov, A. Zimermmane Castro Santos

,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,

University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
A.R. Alves Andrade , M. Antonello , S. Bollweg, M. Bonanomi , K. El Morabit ,
Y. Fischer , M. Frahm, E. Garutti , A. Grohsjean , A.A. Guvenli , J. Haller , D. Hundhausen, G. Kasieczka , P. Keicher , R. Klanner , W. Korcari , T. Kramer , C.c. Kuo,
F. Labe , J. Lange , A. Lobanov , L. Moureaux , K. Nikolopoulos , A. Paasch ,
K.J. Pena Rodriguez , N. Prouvost, B. Raciti , M. Rieger , D. Savoiu , P. Schleper ,
M. Schröder , J. Schwandt , M. Sommerhalder , H. Stadie , G. Steinbrück , R. Ward ,
B. Wiederspan, M. Wolf
Karlsruher Institut fuer Technologie, Karlsruhe, Germany

93
S. Brommer , A. Brusamolino , E. Butz , Y.M. Chen , T. Chwalek , A. Dierlamm ,
G.G. Dincer , U. Elicabuk, N. Faltermann , M. Giffels , A. Gottmann , F. Hartmann30 ,
M. Horzela , F. Hummer , U. Husemann , J. Kieseler , M. Klute , R. Kunnilan Muhammed Rafeek, O. Lavoryk , J.M. Lawhorn , A. Lintuluoto , S. Maier ,
A.A. Monsch , M. Mormile , Th. Müller , E. Pfeffer , M. Presilla , G. Quast ,
K. Rabbertz , B. Regnery , R. Schmieder, N. Shadskiy , I. Shvetsov , H.J. Simonis ,
L. Sowa , L. Stockmeier, K. Tauqeer, M. Toms , B. Topko , N. Trevisani , C. Verstege ,
T. Voigtländer , R.F. Von Cube , J. Von Den Driesch, M. Wassmer , C. Winter, R. Wolf ,
W.D. Zeuner , X. Zuo
Institute of Nuclear and Particle Physics (INPP), NCSR Demokritos, Aghia Paraskevi,
Greece
G. Anagnostou , G. Daskalakis , A. Kyriakis
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
G. Melachroinos, Z. Painesis , I. Paraskevas , N. Saoulidou
E. Tziaferi , E. Tzovara , K. Vellidis , I. Zisopoulos

, K. Theofilatos

,

National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
T. Chatzistavrou , G. Karapostoli , K. Kousouris , E. Siamarkou, G. Tsipolitis
University of Ioánnina, Ioánnina, Greece
I. Bestintzanos, I. Evangelou , C. Foudas, P. Katsoulis, P. Kokkas
moglou Kioseoglou , N. Manthos , I. Papadopoulos , J. Strologas

, P.G. Kos-

HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
D. Druzhkin , C. Hajdu , D. Horvath31,32 , K. Márton, A.J. Rádl33
V. Veszpremi

, F. Sikler

,

MTA-ELTE Lendület CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group, Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, Hungary
M. Csanád , K. Farkas , A. Fehérkuti34 , M.M.A. Gadallah35 , Á. Kadlecsik ,
M. León Coello , G. Pásztor , G.I. Veres
Faculty of Informatics, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
B. Ujvari , G. Zilizi
HUN-REN ATOMKI - Institute of Nuclear Research, Debrecen, Hungary
G. Bencze, S. Czellar, J. Molnar, Z. Szillasi
Karoly Robert Campus, MATE Institute of Technology, Gyongyos, Hungary
T. Csorgo34 , F. Nemes34 , T. Novak , I. Szanyi36
IIT Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India
S. Bahinipati37 , S. Nayak , R. Raturi
Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
S. Bansal , S.B. Beri, V. Bhatnagar , G. Chaudhary , S. Chauhan , N. Dhingra38
A. Kaur , A. Kaur , H. Kaur , M. Kaur , S. Kumar , T. Sheokand, J.B. Singh
A. Singla

,
,

University of Delhi, Delhi, India
A. Bhardwaj , A. Chhetri , B.C. Choudhary
S. Phor , K. Ranjan , M.K. Saini

,

, A. Kumar

, A. Kumar

, M. Naimuddin

Indian Institute of Technology Mandi (IIT-Mandi), Himachal Pradesh, India

94
P. Palni
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
S. Acharya39 , B. Gomber
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India
S. Mukherjee
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, HBNI, Kolkata, India
S. Bhattacharya , S. Das Gupta, S. Dutta , S. Dutta, S. Sarkar
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Madras, India
M.M. Ameen , P.K. Behera , S. Chatterjee , G. Dash , A. Dattamunsi, P. Jana
P. Kalbhor , S. Kamble , J.R. Komaragiri40 , T. Mishra , P.R. Pujahari , A.K. Sikdar
R.K. Singh , P. Verma , S. Verma , A. Vijay

,
,

IISER Mohali, India, Mohali, India
B.K. Sirasva
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-A, Mumbai, India
L. Bhatt, S. Dugad , G.B. Mohanty , M. Shelake , P. Suryadevara
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-B, Mumbai, India
A. Bala , S. Banerjee , S. Barman41 , R.M. Chatterjee, M. Guchait , Sh. Jain , A. Jaiswal,
B.M. Joshi , S. Kumar , M. Maity41 , G. Majumder , K. Mazumdar , S. Parolia ,
R. Saxena , A. Thachayath
National Institute of Science Education and Research, An OCC of Homi Bhabha National
Institute, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
D. Maity42 , P. Mal , K. Naskar42 , A. Nayak42 , K. Pal , P. Sadangi, S.K. Swain ,
S. Varghese42 , D. Vats42
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune, India
A. Alpana , S. Dube , P. Hazarika , B. Kansal , A. Laha , R. Sharma
K.Y. Vaish

, S. Sharma

,

, E. Khazaie

,

INFN Sezione di Baria , Università di Barib , Politecnico di Baric , Bari, Italy
M. Abbresciaa,b , M. Barbieria,b , M. Buonsantea,b , A. Colaleoa,b , D. Creanzaa,c
N. De Filippisa,c , M. De Palmaa,b , W. Elmetenaweea,b,48 , N. Ferraraa,c
L. Fiorea , L. Longoa , M. Loukaa,b , G. Maggia,c , M. Maggia , I. Margjekaa
V. Mastrapasquaa,b , S. Mya,b , F. Nennaa,b , S. Nuzzoa,b , A. Pellecchiaa,b
A. Pompilia,b , G. Pugliesea,c , R. Radognaa,b , D. Ramosa , A. Ranieria
L. Silvestrisa , F.M. Simonea,c , Ü. Sözbilira , A. Stamerraa,b , D. Troianoa,b

,
,
,
,
,
,

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Telangana, India
S. Ghosh
Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
H. Bakhshiansohi43 , A. Jafari44 , V. Sedighzadeh Dalavi

, M. Zeinali45

Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
S. Bashiri , S. Chenarani46 , S.M. Etesami , Y. Hosseini , M. Khakzad
M. Mohammadi Najafabadi , S. Tizchang47
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
M. Felcini , M. Grunewald

95
R. Vendittia,b

, P. Verwilligena

, A. Zazaa,b

INFN Sezione di Bolognaa , Università di Bolognab , Bologna, Italy
G. Abbiendia , C. Battilanaa,b , D. Bonacorsia,b , P. Capiluppia,b , F.R. Cavalloa
M. Cuffiania,b , G.M. Dallavallea , T. Diotalevia,b , F. Fabbria , A. Fanfania,b
R. Farinellia , D. Fasanellaa , P. Giacomellia , C. Grandia , L. Guiduccia,b
S. Lo Meoa,49 , M. Lorussoa,b , L. Lunertia , S. Marcellinia , G. Masettia
F.L. Navarriaa,b , G. Paggia,b , A. Perrottaa , F. Primaveraa,b , A.M. Rossia,b
S. Rossi Tisbenia,b

,
,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Cataniaa , Università di Cataniab , Catania, Italy
S. Costaa,b,50 , A. Di Mattiaa , A. Lapertosaa , R. Potenzaa,b , A. Tricomia,b,50
INFN Sezione di Firenzea , Università di Firenzeb , Firenze, Italy
J. Altorka,b , P. Assiourasa , G. Barbaglia , G. Bardellia , M. Bartolinia,b
A. Calandria,b , B. Camaiania,b , A. Cassesea , R. Ceccarellia , V. Ciullia,b
C. Civininia , R. D’Alessandroa,b , L. Damentia,b , E. Focardia,b , T. Kelloa
G. Latinoa,b , P. Lenzia,b , M. Lizzoa , M. Meschinia , S. Paolettia
A. Papanastassioua,b , G. Sguazzonia , L. Viliania

,
,
,
,

INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
L. Benussi , S. Bianco , S. Meola51 , D. Piccolo
INFN Sezione di Genovaa , Università di Genovab , Genova, Italy
M. Alves Gallo Pereiraa , F. Ferroa , E. Robuttia , S. Tosia,b
INFN Sezione di Milano-Bicoccaa , Università di Milano-Bicoccab , Milano, Italy
A. Benagliaa , F. Brivioa , V. Camagnia,b , F. Cetorellia,b , F. De Guioa,b
M.E. Dinardoa,b , P. Dinia , S. Gennaia , R. Gerosaa,b , A. Ghezzia,b , P. Govonia,b
L. Guzzia , M.R. Kima , G. Lavizzaria,b , M.T. Lucchinia,b , M. Malbertia
S. Malvezzia , A. Massironia , D. Menascea , L. Moronia , M. Paganonia,b
S. Palluottoa,b , D. Pedrinia , A. Peregoa,b , G. Pizzatia,b , T. Tabarelli de Fatisa,b

,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Napolia , Università di Napoli ’Federico II’b , Napoli, Italy; Università della
Basilicatac , Potenza, Italy; Scuola Superiore Meridionale (SSM)d , Napoli, Italy
S. Buontempoa , C. Di Fraiaa,b , F. Fabozzia,c , L. Favillaa,d , A.O.M. Iorioa,b ,
L. Listaa,b,52 , P. Paoluccia,30 , B. Rossia
INFN Sezione di Padovaa , Università di Padovab , Padova, Italy; Universita degli Studi di
Cagliaric , Cagliari, Italy
P. Azzia , N. Bacchettaa,53 , D. Biselloa,b , P. Bortignona,c , G. Bortolatoa,b ,
A.C.M. Bullaa,c , R. Carlina,b , T. Dorigoa,54 , F. Gasparinia,b , S. Giorgettia ,
E. Lusiania , M. Margonia,b , A.T. Meneguzzoa,b , M. Michelottoa , J. Pazzinia,b ,
P. Ronchesea,b , R. Rossina,b , F. Simonettoa,b , M. Tosia,b , A. Triossia,b ,
S. Venturaa , M. Zanettia,b , P. Zottoa,b , A. Zucchettaa,b , G. Zumerlea,b
INFN Sezione di Paviaa , Università di Paviab , Pavia, Italy
A. Braghieria , S. Calzaferria,b , P. Montagnaa,b , M. Pelliccionia,b
C. Riccardia,b , P. Salvinia , I. Vaia,b , P. Vituloa,b

, V. Rea

,

INFN Sezione di Perugiaa , Università di Perugiab , Perugia, Italy
S. Ajmala,b , M.E. Asciotia,b , G.M. Bilei†a , C. Carrivalea,b , D. Ciangottinia,b
L. Della Pennaa,b , L. Fanòa,b , V. Mariania,b , M. Menichellia , F. Moscatellia,55
A. Rossia,b , A. Santocchiaa,b , D. Spigaa , T. Tedeschia,b

,
,

96
INFN Sezione di Pisaa , Università di Pisab , Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisac , Pisa, Italy;
Università di Sienad , Siena, Italy
C. Aimèa,b , C.A. Alexea,c , P. Asenova,b , P. Azzurria , G. Bagliesia , L. Bianchinia,b ,
T. Boccalia , E. Bossinia , D. Bruschinia,c , L. Calligarisa,b , R. Castaldia ,
F. Cattafestaa,c , M.A. Cioccia,d , M. Cipriania,b , R. Dell’Orsoa , S. Donatoa,b ,
R. Fortia,b , A. Giassia , F. Ligabuea,c , A.C. Marinia,b , D. Matos Figueiredoa ,
A. Messineoa,b , S. Mishraa , V.K. Muraleedharan Nair Bindhua,b , S. Nandana ,
F. Pallaa , M. Riggirelloa,c , A. Rizzia,b , G. Rolandia,c , S. Roy Chowdhurya,56 ,
T. Sarkara , A. Scribanoa , P. Solankia,b , P. Spagnoloa , F. Tenchinia,b , R. Tenchinia ,
G. Tonellia,b , N. Turinia,d , F. Vasellia,c , A. Venturia , P.G. Verdinia
INFN Sezione di Romaa , Sapienza Università di Romab , Roma, Italy
P. Akrapa,b , C. Basilea,b , S.C. Beheraa , F. Cavallaria , L. Cunqueiro Mendeza,b
F. De Riggia,b , D. Del Rea,b , E. Di Marcoa , M. Diemoza , F. Erricoa , L. Frosinaa,b
R. Gargiuloa,b , B. Harikrishnana,b , F. Lombardia,b , E. Longoa,b , L. Martikainena,b
J. Mijuskovica,b , G. Organtinia,b , N. Palmeria,b , R. Paramattia,b , S. Rahatloua,b
C. Rovellia , F. Santanastasioa,b , L. Soffia , V. Vladimirova,b

,
,
,
,

INFN Sezione di Torinoa , Università di Torinob , Torino, Italy; Università del Piemonte
Orientalec , Novara, Italy
N. Amapanea,b , R. Arcidiaconoa,c , S. Argiroa,b , M. Arneodoa,c , N. Bartosika,c ,
R. Bellana,b , A. Belloraa,b , C. Biinoa , C. Borcaa,b , N. Cartigliaa , M. Costaa,b ,
R. Covarellia,b , N. Demariaa , L. Fincoa , M. Grippoa,b , B. Kiania,b , L. Lanteria,b ,
F. Leggera , F. Luongoa,b , C. Mariottia , S. Masellia , A. Meccaa,b , L. Menzioa,b ,
P. Meridiania , E. Migliorea,b , M. Montenoa , M.M. Obertinoa,b , G. Ortonaa ,
L. Pachera,b , N. Pastronea , M. Ruspaa,c , F. Sivieroa,b , V. Solaa,b , A. Solanoa,b ,
A. Staianoa , C. Tarriconea,b , D. Trocinoa , G. Umoreta,b , E. Vlasova,b , R. Whitea,b
INFN Sezione di Triestea , Università di Triesteb , Trieste, Italy
J. Babbara,b , S. Belfortea , V. Candelisea,b , M. Casarsaa , F. Cossuttia
G. Della Riccaa,b , R. Delli Gattia,b

, K. De Leoa

,

Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea
S. Dogra , J. Hong , J. Kim, T. Kim , D. Lee , H. Lee
Y.D. Oh , S. Sekmen , B. Tae, Y.C. Yang

, C.S. Moon

,

, J. Lee, S.W. Lee

Department of Mathematics and Physics - GWNU, Gangneung, Korea
M.S. Kim
Chonnam National University, Institute for Universe and Elementary Particles, Kwangju,
Korea
G. Bak , P. Gwak , H. Kim , D.H. Moon , J. Seo
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
E. Asilar , F. Carnevali , J. Choi57

, T.J. Kim

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
S. Ha , S. Han, B. Hong , J. Kim

, K. Lee, K.S. Lee

, Y. Ryou
, S. Lee

Kyung Hee University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
J. Goh , J. Shin , S. Yang
Sejong University, Seoul, Korea
Y. Kang , H. S. Kim , Y. Kim , S. Lee

, J. Yoo

97
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
J. Almond, J.H. Bhyun, J. Choi , J. Choi, W. Jun , H. Kim , J. Kim , T. Kim, Y. Kim ,
Y.W. Kim , S. Ko , H. Lee , J. Lee , J. Lee , B.H. Oh , S.B. Oh , J. Shin , U.K. Yang,
I. Yoon
University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
W. Jang , D.Y. Kang, D. Kim , S. Kim
I.J. Watson

, B. Ko, J.S.H. Lee

, Y. Lee

, I.C. Park

, Y. Roh,

Yonsei University, Department of Physics, Seoul, Korea
G. Cho, K. Hwang , B. Kim , S. Kim, K. Lee , H.D. Yoo
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
Y. Lee , I. Yu
College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle East (AUM),
Dasman, Kuwait
T. Beyrouthy , Y. Gharbia
Kuwait University - College of Science - Department of Physics, Safat, Kuwait
F. Alazemi
Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia
K. Dreimanis , O.M. Eberlins , A. Gaile , C. Munoz Diaz
R. Plese , A. Potrebko , M. Seidel , D. Sidiropoulos Kontos

, D. Osite

, G. Pikurs

,

University of Latvia (LU), Riga, Latvia
N.R. Strautnieks
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
M. Ambrozas , A. Juodagalvis , S. Nargelas

, A. Rinkevicius

, G. Tamulaitis

National Centre for Particle Physics, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
I. Yusuff58 , Z. Zolkapli
Universidad de Sonora (UNISON), Hermosillo, Mexico
J.F. Benitez , A. Castaneda Hernandez , A. Cota Rodriguez , L.E. Cuevas Picos,
H.A. Encinas Acosta, L.G. Gallegos Marı́ñez, J.A. Murillo Quijada , L. Valencia Palomo
Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Mexico City, Mexico
G. Ayala , H. Castilla-Valdez , H. Crotte Ledesma , R. Lopez-Fernandez
J. Mejia Guisao , R. Reyes-Almanza , A. Sánchez Hernández
Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico City, Mexico
C. Oropeza Barrera , D.L. Ramirez Guadarrama, M. Ramı́rez Garcı́a
Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico
I. Bautista , F.E. Neri Huerta , I. Pedraza , H.A. Salazar Ibarguen

, C. Uribe Estrada

University of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro
I. Bubanja , N. Raicevic
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
P.H. Butler
National Centre for Physics, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
A. Ahmad , M.I. Asghar , A. Awais , M.I.M. Awan, W.A. Khan

,

98
AGH University of Krakow, Krakow, Poland
V. Avati, L. Forthomme , L. Grzanka , M. Malawski

, K. Piotrzkowski

National Centre for Nuclear Research, Swierk, Poland
M. Bluj , M. Górski , M. Kazana , M. Szleper , P. Zalewski
Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
K. Bunkowski , K. Doroba , A. Kalinowski , M. Konecki , J. Krolikowski ,
A. Muhammad
Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
P. Fokow , K. Pozniak , W. Zabolotny
Laboratório de Instrumentação e Fı́sica Experimental de Partı́culas, Lisboa, Portugal
M. Araujo , D. Bastos , C. Beirão Da Cruz E Silva , A. Boletti , M. Bozzo
T. Camporesi , G. Da Molin , M. Gallinaro , J. Hollar , N. Leonardo , G.B. Marozzo
A. Petrilli , M. Pisano , J. Seixas , J. Varela , J.W. Wulff

,
,

Faculty of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
P. Adzic , L. Markovic , P. Milenovic , V. Milosevic
VINCA Institute of Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
D. Devetak , M. Dordevic , J. Milosevic , L. Nadderd , V. Rekovic, M. Stojanovic
Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas Medioambientales y Tecnológicas (CIEMAT),
Madrid, Spain
M. Alcalde Martinez , J. Alcaraz Maestre , Cristina F. Bedoya , J.A. Brochero Cifuentes ,
Oliver M. Carretero , M. Cepeda , M. Cerrada , N. Colino , B. De La Cruz ,
A. Delgado Peris , A. Escalante Del Valle , D. Fernández Del Val , J.P. Fernández Ramos ,
J. Flix , M.C. Fouz , M. Gonzalez Hernandez , O. Gonzalez Lopez , S. Goy Lopez ,
J.M. Hernandez , M.I. Josa , J. Llorente Merino , C. Martin Perez , E. Martin Viscasillas , D. Moran , C. M. Morcillo Perez , Á. Navarro Tobar , R. Paz Herrera ,
C. Perez Dengra , A. Pérez-Calero Yzquierdo , J. Puerta Pelayo , I. Redondo ,
J. Vazquez Escobar
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
J.F. de Trocóniz
Universidad de Oviedo, Instituto Universitario de Ciencias y Tecnologı́as Espaciales de
Asturias (ICTEA), Oviedo, Spain
B. Alvarez Gonzalez , J. Ayllon Torresano , A. Cardini , J. Cuevas , J. Del Riego Badas ,
D. Estrada Acevedo , J. Fernandez Menendez , S. Folgueras , I. Gonzalez Caballero , P. Leguina , M. Obeso Menendez , E. Palencia Cortezon , J. Prado Pico ,
A. Soto Rodrı́guez , P. Vischia
Instituto de Fı́sica de Cantabria (IFCA), CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain
S. Blanco Fernández , I.J. Cabrillo , A. Calderon , J. Duarte Campderros , M. Fernandez , G. Gomez , C. Lasaosa Garcı́a , R. Lopez Ruiz , C. Martinez Rivero ,
P. Martinez Ruiz del Arbol , F. Matorras , P. Matorras Cuevas , E. Navarrete Ramos ,
J. Piedra Gomez , C. Quintana San Emeterio , L. Scodellaro , I. Vila , R. Vilar Cortabitarte , J.M. Vizan Garcia
University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka
B. Kailasapathy59 , D.D.C. Wickramarathna

99
University of Ruhuna, Department of Physics, Matara, Sri Lanka
W.G.D. Dharmaratna60 , K. Liyanage , N. Perera
CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
D. Abbaneo , C. Amendola , R. Ardino , E. Auffray , J. Baechler, D. Barney , J. Bendavid , M. Bianco , A. Bocci , L. Borgonovi , C. Botta , A. Bragagnolo , C.E. Brown ,
C. Caillol , G. Cerminara , P. Connor , D. d’Enterria , A. Dabrowski , A. David ,
A. De Roeck , M.M. Defranchis , M. Deile , M. Dobson , P.J. Fernández Manteca ,
B.A. Fontana Santos Alves , E. Fontanesi , W. Funk , A. Gaddi, S. Giani, D. Gigi,
K. Gill , F. Glege , M. Glowacki, A. Gruber , J. Hegeman , J.K. Heikkilä , R. Hofsaess ,
B. Huber , T. James , P. Janot , O. Kaluzinska , O. Karacheban28 , G. Karathanasis ,
S. Laurila , P. Lecoq , E. Leutgeb , C. Lourenço , A.-M. Lyon , M. Magherini ,
L. Malgeri , M. Mannelli , A. Mehta , F. Meijers , J.A. Merlin, S. Mersi , E. Meschi ,
M. Migliorini , F. Monti , F. Moortgat , M. Mulders , M. Musich , I. Neutelings ,
S. Orfanelli, F. Pantaleo , M. Pari , G. Petrucciani , A. Pfeiffer , M. Pierini , M. Pitt ,
H. Qu , D. Rabady , A. Reimers , B. Ribeiro Lopes , F. Riti , P. Rosado , M. Rovere ,
H. Sakulin , R. Salvatico , S. Sanchez Cruz , S. Scarfi , M. Selvaggi , K. Shchelina ,
P. Silva , P. Sphicas61 , A.G. Stahl Leiton , A. Steen , S. Summers , D. Treille ,
P. Tropea , E. Vernazza , J. Wanczyk62 , S. Wuchterl , M. Zarucki , P. Zehetner ,
P. Zejdl , G. Zevi Della Porta
PSI Center for Neutron and Muon Sciences, Villigen, Switzerland
T. Bevilacqua63 , L. Caminada63 , W. Erdmann , R. Horisberger , Q. Ingram
H.C. Kaestli , D. Kotlinski , C. Lange , U. Langenegger , A. Nigamova , L. Noehte63
T. Rohe , A. Samalan

,
,

ETH Zurich - Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics (IPA), Zurich, Switzerland
T.K. Aarrestad , M. Backhaus , G. Bonomelli , C. Cazzaniga , K. Datta ,
P. De Bryas Dexmiers D’Archiacchiac62 , A. De Cosa , G. Dissertori , M. Dittmar,
M. Donegà , F. Eble , K. Gedia , F. Glessgen , C. Grab , N. Härringer , T.G. Harte ,
W. Lustermann , M. Malucchi , R.A. Manzoni , L. Marchese , A. Mascellani62 ,
F. Nessi-Tedaldi , F. Pauss , V. Perovic , B. Ristic , R. Seidita , J. Steggemann62 ,
A. Tarabini , D. Valsecchi , R. Wallny
Universität Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland
C. Amsler64 , P. Bärtschi , F. Bilandzija , M.F. Canelli , G. Celotto , K. Cormier
M. Huwiler , A. Jofrehei , B. Kilminster , T.H. Kwok , S. Leontsinis , V. Lukashenko
A. Macchiolo , F. Meng , M. Missiroli , J. Motta , P. Robmann, E. Shokr , F. Stäger
R. Tramontano , P. Viscone

,
,
,

National Central University, Chung-Li, Taiwan
D. Bhowmik, C.M. Kuo, P.K. Rout , S. Taj , P.C. Tiwari40
National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan
L. Ceard, K.F. Chen , Z.g. Chen, A. De Iorio , W.-S. Hou , T.h. Hsu, Y.w. Kao,
S. Karmakar , G. Kole , Y.y. Li , R.-S. Lu , E. Paganis , X.f. Su , J. Thomas-Wilsker ,
L.s. Tsai, D. Tsionou, H.y. Wu , E. Yazgan
High Energy Physics Research Unit, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
C. Asawatangtrakuldee , N. Srimanobhas
Tunis El Manar University, Tunis, Tunisia

100
Y. Maghrbi
Çukurova University, Physics Department, Science and Art Faculty, Adana, Turkey
D. Agyel , F. Dolek , I. Dumanoglu65 , Y. Guler66 , E. Gurpinar Guler66 , C. Isik
O. Kara , A. Kayis Topaksu , Y. Komurcu , G. Onengut , K. Ozdemir67 , B. Tali68
U.G. Tok , E. Uslan , I.S. Zorbakir

,
,

Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
S. Sen
Middle East Technical University, Physics Department, Ankara, Turkey
M. Yalvac69
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Akgun , I.O. Atakisi70 , E. Gülmez
S. Tekten74

, M. Kaya71

, O. Kaya72

, M.A. Sarkisla73 ,

Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
D. Boncukcu , A. Cakir , K. Cankocak65,75
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
B. Hacisahinoglu , I. Hos76 , B. Kaynak
C. Simsek , C. Zorbilmez

, S. Ozkorucuklu

Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
S. Cerci , C. Dozen77 , B. Isildak78 , E. Simsek

, O. Potok

, D. Sunar Cerci

, H. Sert

,

, T. Yetkin77

Institute for Scintillation Materials of National Academy of Science of Ukraine, Kharkiv,
Ukraine
A. Boyaryntsev , O. Dadazhanova, B. Grynyov
National Science Centre, Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology, Kharkiv, Ukraine
L. Levchuk
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
J.J. Brooke , A. Bundock , F. Bury , E. Clement , D. Cussans , D. Dharmender,
H. Flacher , J. Goldstein , H.F. Heath , M.-L. Holmberg , L. Kreczko , S. Paramesvaran , L. Robertshaw , M.S. Sanjrani43 , J. Segal, V.J. Smith
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
A.H. Ball, K.W. Bell , A. Belyaev79 , C. Brew , R.M. Brown , D.J.A. Cockerill ,
A. Elliot , K.V. Ellis, J. Gajownik , K. Harder , S. Harper , J. Linacre , K. Manolopoulos,
M. Moallemi , D.M. Newbold , E. Olaiya , D. Petyt , T. Reis , A.R. Sahasransu ,
G. Salvi , T. Schuh, C.H. Shepherd-Themistocleous , I.R. Tomalin , K.C. Whalen ,
T. Williams
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
I. Andreou , R. Bainbridge , P. Bloch , O. Buchmuller, C.A. Carrillo Montoya ,
D. Colling , I. Das , P. Dauncey , G. Davies , M. Della Negra , S. Fayer, G. Fedi ,
G. Hall , H.R. Hoorani , A. Howard, G. Iles , C.R. Knight , P. Krueper , J. Langford ,
K.H. Law , J. León Holgado , L. Lyons , A.-M. Magnan , B. Maier , S. Mallios,
A. Mastronikolis , M. Mieskolainen , J. Nash80 , M. Pesaresi , P.B. Pradeep ,
B.C. Radburn-Smith , A. Richards, A. Rose , L. Russell , K. Savva , C. Seez ,
R. Shukla , A. Tapper , K. Uchida , G.P. Uttley , T. Virdee30 , M. Vojinovic ,
N. Wardle , D. Winterbottom

101
Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom
J.E. Cole , A. Khan, P. Kyberd , I.D. Reid
Baylor University, Waco, Texas, USA
S. Abdullin , A. Brinkerhoff , E. Collins , M.R. Darwish , J. Dittmann
K. Hatakeyama , V. Hegde , J. Hiltbrand , B. McMaster , J. Samudio , S. Sawant
C. Sutantawibul , J. Wilson

,
,

Bethel University, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
J.M. Hogan
Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA
R. Bartek , A. Dominguez , S. Raj , B. Sahu39 , A.E. Simsek

, S.S. Yu

The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA
B. Bam , A. Buchot Perraguin , S. Campbell, R. Chudasama , S.I. Cooper , C. Crovella
G. Fidalgo , S.V. Gleyzer , A. Khukhunaishvili , K. Matchev , E. Pearson, C.U. Perez
P. Rumerio81 , E. Usai , R. Yi

,
,

Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
S. Cholak , G. De Castro, Z. Demiragli , C. Erice , C. Fangmeier , C. Fernandez Madrazo , J. Fulcher , F. Golf , S. Jeon , J. O’Cain, I. Reed , J. Rohlf , K. Salyer ,
D. Sperka , D. Spitzbart , I. Suarez , A. Tsatsos , E. Wurtz, A.G. Zecchinelli
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
G. Barone , G. Benelli , D. Cutts , S. Ellis , L. Gouskos , M. Hadley , U. Heintz
K.W. Ho , T. Kwon , L. Lambrecht , G. Landsberg , K.T. Lau , J. Luo , S. Mondal
J. Roloff, T. Russell , S. Sagir82 , X. Shen , M. Stamenkovic , N. Venkatasubramanian

,
,

University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
S.
Abbott ,
S.
Baradia ,
B.
Barton ,
R.
Breedon ,
H.
Cai ,
M. Calderon De La Barca Sanchez , E. Cannaert, M. Chertok , M. Citron , J. Conway ,
P.T. Cox , R. Erbacher , O. Kukral , G. Mocellin , S. Ostrom , I. Salazar Segovia,
J.S. Tafoya Vargas , W. Wei , S. Yoo
University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA
K. Adamidis, M. Bachtis , D. Campos, R. Cousins , S. Crossley , G. Flores Avila
J. Hauser , M. Ignatenko , M.A. Iqbal , T. Lam , Y.f. Lo , E. Manca
A. Nunez Del Prado , D. Saltzberg , V. Valuev

,
,

University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA
R. Clare , J.W. Gary , G. Hanson
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
A. Aportela , A. Arora , J.G. Branson , S. Cittolin , S. Cooperstein , B. D’Anzi ,
D. Diaz , J. Duarte , L. Giannini , Y. Gu, J. Guiang , V. Krutelyov , R. Lee ,
J. Letts , H. Li, M. Masciovecchio , F. Mokhtar , S. Mukherjee , M. Pieri , D. Primosch,
M. Quinnan , V. Sharma , M. Tadel , E. Vourliotis , F. Würthwein , A. Yagil ,
Z. Zhao
University of California, Santa Barbara - Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, California,
USA
A. Barzdukas , L. Brennan , C. Campagnari , S. Carron Montero83 , K. Downham ,
C. Grieco , M.M. Hussain, J. Incandela , M.W.K. Lai, A.J. Li , P. Masterson ,
J. Richman , S.N. Santpur , U. Sarica , R. Schmitz , D. Stuart , T.Á. Vámi , X. Yan ,

102
D. Zhang
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA
A. Albert , S. Bhattacharya , A. Bornheim , O. Cerri, R. Kansal , J. Mao , H.B. Newman , G. Reales Gutiérrez, T. Sievert, M. Spiropulu , J.R. Vlimant , R.A. Wynne , S. Xie
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
J. Alison , S. An , M. Cremonesi, V. Dutta , E.Y. Ertorer , T. Ferguson , T.A. Gómez Espinosa , A. Harilal , A. Kallil Tharayil, M. Kanemura, C. Liu , M. Marchegiani ,
P. Meiring , S. Murthy , P. Palit , K. Park , M. Paulini , A. Roberts , A. Sanchez ,
W. Terrill
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA
J.P. Cumalat , W.T. Ford , A. Hart , S. Kwan , J. Pearkes , C. Savard
K. Stenson , K.A. Ulmer , S.R. Wagner , N. Zipper , D. Zuolo

, N. Schonbeck

,

Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
J. Alexander , X. Chen , J. Dickinson , A. Duquette, J. Fan , X. Fan , J. Grassi
S. Hogan , P. Kotamnives , J. Monroy , G. Niendorf , M. Oshiro , J.R. Patterson
A. Ryd , J. Thom , P. Wittich , R. Zou , L. Zygala

,
,

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois, USA
M. Albrow , M. Alyari , O. Amram , G. Apollinari , A. Apresyan , L.A.T. Bauerdick ,
D. Berry , J. Berryhill , P.C. Bhat , K. Burkett , J.N. Butler , A. Canepa ,
G.B. Cerati , H.W.K. Cheung , F. Chlebana , C. Cosby , G. Cummings , I. Dutta ,
V.D. Elvira , J. Freeman , A. Gandrakota , Z. Gecse , L. Gray , D. Green, A. Grummer , S. Grünendahl , D. Guerrero , O. Gutsche , R.M. Harris , T.C. Herwig ,
J. Hirschauer , V. Innocente , B. Jayatilaka , S. Jindariani , M. Johnson , U. Joshi ,
B. Klima , K.H.M. Kwok , S. Lammel , C. Lee , D. Lincoln , R. Lipton , T. Liu ,
K. Maeshima , D. Mason , P. McBride , P. Merkel , S. Mrenna , S. Nahn ,
J. Ngadiuba , D. Noonan , S. Norberg, V. Papadimitriou , N. Pastika , K. Pedro ,
C. Pena84 , C.E. Perez Lara , F. Ravera , A. Reinsvold Hall85 , L. Ristori , M. Safdari ,
E. Sexton-Kennedy , N. Smith , A. Soha , L. Spiegel , S. Stoynev , J. Strait ,
L. Taylor , S. Tkaczyk , N.V. Tran , L. Uplegger , E.W. Vaandering , C. Wang , I. Zoi
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
C. Aruta , P. Avery , D. Bourilkov , P. Chang , V. Cherepanov , R.D. Field,
C. Huh , E. Koenig , M. Kolosova , J. Konigsberg , A. Korytov , G. Mitselmakher ,
K. Mohrman , A. Muthirakalayil Madhu , N. Rawal , S. Rosenzweig , V. Sulimov ,
Y. Takahashi , J. Wang
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA
T. Adams , A. Al Kadhim , A. Askew , S. Bower , R. Goff, R. Hashmi , A. Hassani
R.S. Kim , T. Kolberg , G. Martinez , M. Mazza , H. Prosper , P.R. Prova, R. Yohay

,

Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Florida, USA
B. Alsufyani , S. Butalla , S. Das , M. Hohlmann , M. Lavinsky, E. Yanes
University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
M.R. Adams , N. Barnett, A. Baty , C. Bennett , R. Cavanaugh , R. Escobar Franco ,
O. Evdokimov , C.E. Gerber , H. Gupta , M. Hawksworth, A. Hingrajiya, D.J. Hofman ,
Z. Huang , J.h. Lee , C. Mills , S. Nanda , G. Nigmatkulov , B. Ozek , T. Phan,
D. Pilipovic , R. Pradhan , E. Prifti, P. Roy, T. Roy , D. Shekar, N. Singh, M.B. Tonjes ,
N. Varelas , M.A. Wadud , J. Yoo

103
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
M. Alhusseini , D. Blend , K. Dilsiz86 , O.K. Köseyan
H. Ogul88 , Y. Onel , A. Penzo , C. Snyder, E. Tiras89

, A. Mestvirishvili87

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
B. Blumenfeld , J. Davis , A.V. Gritsan , L. Kang , S. Kyriacou
M. Roguljic , S. Sekhar , M.V. Srivastav , M. Swartz

, O. Neogi,

, P. Maksimovic

,

The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA
A. Abreu , L.F. Alcerro Alcerro , J. Anguiano , S. Arteaga Escatel , P. Baringer
A. Bean , R. Bhattacharya , Z. Flowers , D. Grove , J. King , G. Krintiras
M. Lazarovits , C. Le Mahieu , J. Marquez , M. Murray , M. Nickel , S. Popescu90
C. Rogan , C. Royon , S. Rudrabhatla , S. Sanders , C. Smith , G. Wilson

,
,
,

Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA
B. Allmond , N. Islam, A. Ivanov , K. Kaadze , Y. Maravin
D. Roy , G. Sorrentino

, G.G. Reddy

,

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
A. Baden , A. Belloni , J. Bistany-riebman, S.C. Eno , N.J. Hadley , S. Jabeen
R.G. Kellogg , T. Koeth , B. Kronheim, S. Lascio , P. Major , A.C. Mignerey
C. Palmer , C. Papageorgakis , M.M. Paranjpe, E. Popova91 , A. Shevelev , L. Zhang

,
,

, J. Natoli

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
C. Baldenegro Barrera , H. Bossi , S. Bright-Thonney , I.A. Cali , Y.c. Chen ,
P.c. Chou , M. D’Alfonso , J. Eysermans , C. Freer , G. Gomez-Ceballos , M. Goncharov, G. Grosso , P. Harris, D. Hoang , G.M. Innocenti , K. Ivanov , D. Kovalskyi ,
J. Krupa , L. Lavezzo , Y.-J. Lee , K. Long , C. Mcginn , A. Novak , M.I. Park ,
C. Paus , C. Reissel , C. Roland , G. Roland , S. Rothman , T.a. Sheng ,
G.S.F. Stephans , D. Walter , J. Wang, Z. Wang , B. Wyslouch , T. J. Yang
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
B. Crossman , W.J. Jackson, C. Kapsiak , M. Krohn , D. Mahon
B. Marzocchi , R. Rusack , O. Sancar , R. Saradhy , N. Strobbe

, J. Mans

,

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA
K. Bloom , D.R. Claes , G. Haza , J. Hossain , C. Joo , I. Kravchenko
J.E. Siado , W. Tabb , A. Vagnerini , A. Wightman , F. Yan

, A. Rohilla

,

State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
H. Bandyopadhyay , L. Hay , H.w. Hsia , I. Iashvili , A. Kalogeropoulos ,
A. Kharchilava , A. Mandal , M. Morris , D. Nguyen , S. Rappoccio , H. Rejeb Sfar,
A. Williams , P. Young , D. Yu
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
G. Alverson , E. Barberis , J. Bonilla , B. Bylsma, M. Campana , J. Dervan
Y. Haddad , Y. Han , I. Israr , A. Krishna , M. Lu , N. Manganelli , R. Mccarthy
D.M. Morse , T. Orimoto , L. Skinnari , C.S. Thoreson , E. Tsai , D. Wood

,
,

Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
S. Dittmer , K.A. Hahn , M. Mcginnis , Y. Miao
A. Taliercio , M. Velasco , J. Wang

,

, D.G. Monk

University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA
G. Agarwal , R. Band , R. Bucci, S. Castells , A. Das

, M.H. Schmitt

, A. Datta

, A. Ehnis,

104
R. Goldouzian , M. Hildreth , K. Hurtado Anampa , T. Ivanov , C. Jessop ,
A. Karneyeu , K. Lannon , J. Lawrence , N. Loukas , L. Lutton , J. Mariano ,
N. Marinelli, T. McCauley , C. Mcgrady , C. Moore , Y. Musienko24 , H. Nelson ,
M. Osherson , A. Piccinelli , R. Ruchti , A. Townsend , Y. Wan, M. Wayne , H. Yockey
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
A. Basnet , M. Carrigan , R. De Los Santos , L.S. Durkin
D.A. Wenzl, B.L. Winer , B. R. Yates

, C. Hill

, M. Joyce

,

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA
H. Bouchamaoui , G. Dezoort , P. Elmer , A. Frankenthal , M. Galli , B. Greenberg
N. Haubrich , K. Kennedy, G. Kopp , Y. Lai , D. Lange , A. Loeliger , D. Marlow
I. Ojalvo , J. Olsen , F. Simpson , D. Stickland , C. Tully

,
,

University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, USA
S. Malik , R. Sharma
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
S. Chandra , R. Chawla , A. Gu , L. Gutay, M. Jones , A.W. Jung , D. Kondratyev
M. Liu , G. Negro , N. Neumeister , G. Paspalaki , S. Piperov , N.R. Saha
J.F. Schulte , F. Wang , A. Wildridge , W. Xie , Y. Yao , Y. Zhong

,
,

Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, Indiana, USA
N. Parashar , A. Pathak , E. Shumka
Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA
D. Acosta , A. Agrawal , C. Arbour , T. Carnahan , P. Das , K.M. Ecklund , S. Freed,
F.J.M. Geurts , T. Huang , I. Krommydas , N. Lewis, W. Li , J. Lin , O. Miguel Colin ,
B.P. Padley , R. Redjimi , J. Rotter , C. Vico Villalba , M. Wulansatiti , E. Yigitbasi ,
Y. Zhang
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA
O. Bessidskaia Bylund, A. Bodek , P. de Barbaro† , R. Demina , A. Garcia-Bellido
H.S. Hare , O. Hindrichs , N. Parmar , P. Parygin91 , H. Seo , R. Taus

,

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA
B. Chiarito, J.P. Chou , S.V. Clark , S. Donnelly, D. Gadkari , Y. Gershtein
E. Halkiadakis , C. Houghton , D. Jaroslawski , A. Kobert , S. Konstantinou
I. Laflotte , A. Lath , J. Martins , M. Perez Prada , B. Rand , J. Reichert , P. Saha
S. Salur , S. Schnetzer, S. Somalwar , R. Stone , S.A. Thayil , S. Thomas, J. Vora

,
,
,

University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
D. Ally , A.G. Delannoy , S. Fiorendi , J. Harris, T. Holmes , A.R. Kanuganti
N. Karunarathna , J. Lawless, L. Lee , E. Nibigira , B. Skipworth, S. Spanier

,

Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
D. Aebi , M. Ahmad , T. Akhter , K. Androsov , A. Bolshov, O. Bouhali92
A. Cagnotta , V. D’Amante , R. Eusebi , P. Flanagan , J. Gilmore , Y. Guo, T. Kamon
S. Luo , R. Mueller , A. Safonov

,
,

Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA
N. Akchurin , J. Damgov , Y. Feng , N. Gogate , W. Jin , Y. Kazhykarim,
K. Lamichhane , S.W. Lee , C. Madrid , A. Mankel , T. Peltola , I. Volobouev
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA

105
E. Appelt , Y. Chen , S. Greene, A. Gurrola , W. Johns , R. Kunnawalkam Elayavalli
A. Melo , D. Rathjens , F. Romeo , P. Sheldon , S. Tuo , J. Velkovska , J. Viinikainen
J. Zhang
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
B. Cardwell , H. Chung , B. Cox , J. Hakala , G. Hamilton Ilha Machado, R. Hirosky
M. Jose, A. Ledovskoy , C. Mantilla , C. Neu , C. Ramón Álvarez , Z. Wu

,
,

,

Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
S. Bhattacharya , P.E. Karchin
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
A. Aravind , S. Banerjee , K. Black , T. Bose , E. Chavez , S. Dasu , P. Everaerts
C. Galloni, H. He , M. Herndon , A. Herve , C.K. Koraka , S. Lomte , R. Loveless
A. Mallampalli , A. Mohammadi , S. Mondal, T. Nelson, G. Parida , L. Pétré
D. Pinna , A. Savin, V. Shang , V. Sharma , W.H. Smith , D. Teague, H.F. Tsoi
W. Vetens , A. Warden

,
,
,
,

Authors affiliated with an international laboratory covered by a cooperation agreement with
CERN
S. Afanasiev , V. Alexakhin , Yu. Andreev , T. Aushev , D. Budkouski , R. Chistov ,
M. Danilov , T. Dimova , A. Ershov , S. Gninenko , I. Gorbunov , A. Gribushin ,
A. Kamenev , V. Karjavine , M. Kirsanov , V. Klyukhin , O. Kodolova93 , V. Korenkov , I. Korsakov, A. Kozyrev , N. Krasnikov , A. Lanev , A. Malakhov ,
V. Matveev , A. Nikitenko94,93 , V. Palichik , V. Perelygin , S. Petrushanko ,
S. Polikarpov , O. Radchenko , M. Savina , V. Shalaev , S. Shmatov , S. Shulha ,
Y. Skovpen , K. Slizhevskiy, V. Smirnov , O. Teryaev , I. Tlisova , A. Toropin ,
N. Voytishin , A. Zarubin , I. Zhizhin
Authors affiliated with an institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
E. Boos , V. Bunichev , M. Dubinin84 , V. Savrin , A. Snigirev , L. Dudko , V. Kim24 ,
V. Murzin , V. Oreshkin , D. Sosnov
†: Deceased
1 Also at Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia
2 Also at TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3 Also at Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
4 Also at FACAMP - Faculdades de Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil
5 Also at Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
6 Also at Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
7 Also at Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil
8 Also at The University of the State of Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil
9 Also at University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
10 Also at China Center of Advanced Science and Technology, Beijing, China
11 Also at University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
12 Also at School of Physics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
13 Now at Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, China
14 Also at University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
15 Now at The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
16 Also at Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China
17 Also at Center for High Energy Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China
18 Also at Zewail City of Science and Technology, Zewail, Egypt

106
19 Also at British University in Egypt, Cairo, Egypt
20 Now at Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt
21 Also at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
22 Also at Université de Haute Alsace, Mulhouse, France
23 Also at Ilia State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
24 Also at an institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
25 Also at University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
26 Also at RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
27 Also at Bergische University Wuppertal (BUW), Wuppertal, Germany
28 Also at Brandenburg University of Technology, Cottbus, Germany
29 Also at Forschungszentrum Jülich, Juelich, Germany
30 Also at CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
31 Also at HUN-REN ATOMKI - Institute of Nuclear Research, Debrecen, Hungary
32 Now at Universitatea Babes-Bolyai - Facultatea de Fizica, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
33 Also at MTA-ELTE Lendület CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group,

Eötvös Loránd

University, Budapest, Hungary
34 Also at HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
35 Also at Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt
36 Also at The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA
37 Also at IIT Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India
38 Also at Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India
39 Also at University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
40 Also at Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, India
41 Also at University of Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan, India
42 Also at Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar, India
43 Also at Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
44 Also at Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
45 Also at Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
46 Also at Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of Mazandaran,
Behshahr, Iran
47 Also at Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Arak University, ARAK, Iran
48 Also at Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt
49 Also at Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic
Development, Bologna, Italy
50 Also at Centro Siciliano di Fisica Nucleare e di Struttura Della Materia, Catania, Italy
51 Also at Università degli Studi Guglielmo Marconi, Roma, Italy
52 Also at Scuola Superiore Meridionale, Università di Napoli ’Federico II’, Napoli, Italy
53 Also at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois, USA
54 Also at Lulea University of Technology, Lulea, Sweden
55 Also at Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Officina dei Materiali, Perugia, Italy
56 Also at UPES - University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, India
57 Also at Institut de Physique des 2 Infinis de Lyon (IP2I ), Villeurbanne, France
58 Also at Department of Applied Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia
59 Also at Trincomalee Campus, Eastern University, Sri Lanka, Nilaveli, Sri Lanka
60 Also at Saegis Campus, Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
61 Also at National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
62 Also at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
63 Also at Universität Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland

107
64 Also at Stefan Meyer Institute for Subatomic Physics, Vienna, Austria
65 Also at Near East University,

Research Center of Experimental Health Science, Mersin,
Turkey
66 Also at Konya Technical University, Konya, Turkey
67 Also at Izmir Bakircay University, Izmir, Turkey
68 Also at Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, Turkey
69 Also at Bozok Universitetesi Rektörlügü, Yozgat, Turkey
70 Also at Istanbul Sabahattin Zaim University, Istanbul, Turkey
71 Also at Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey
72 Also at Milli Savunma University, Istanbul, Turkey
73 Also at Informatics and Information Security Research Center, Gebze/Kocaeli, Turkey
74 Also at Kafkas University, Kars, Turkey
75 Now at Istanbul Okan University, Istanbul, Turkey
76 Also at Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa, Faculty of Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey
77 Also at Istinye University, Istanbul, Turkey
78 Also at Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
79 Also at School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom
80 Also at Monash University, Faculty of Science, Clayton, Australia
81 Also at Università di Torino, Torino, Italy
82 Also at Karamanoğlu Mehmetbey University, Karaman, Turkey
83 Also at California Lutheran University;, Thousand Oaks, California, USA
84 Also at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA
85 Also at United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, USA
86 Also at Bingol University, Bingol, Turkey
87 Also at Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
88 Also at Sinop University, Sinop, Turkey
89 Also at Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey
90 Also at Horia Hulubei National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering (IFIN-HH),
Bucharest, Romania
91 Now at another institute formerly covered by a cooperation agreement with CERN
92 Also at Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Doha, Qatar
93 Also at Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
94 Also at Imperial College, London, United Kingdom

