PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 1 Gradient-Based Learning Applied to Document Recognition Yann LeCun, L eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haner Abstract | I. Introduction Multilayer Neural Networks trained with the backpropa- gation algorithm constitute the best example of a successful Over the last several years, machine learning techniques, Gradient-Based Learning technique. Given an appropriate particularly when applied to neural networks, have played network architecture, Gradient-Based Learning algorithms an increasingly important role in the design of pattern can be used to synthesize a complex decision surface that can classify high-dimensional patterns such as handwritten char- recognition systems. In fact, it could be argued that the acters, with minimal preprocessing. This paper reviews var- availability of learning techniques has been a crucial fac- ious methods applied to handwritten character recognition tor in the recent success of pattern recognition applica- and compares them on a standard handwritten digit recog- nition task. Convolutional Neural Networks, that are specif- tions such as continuous speech recognition and handwrit- ically designed to deal with the variability of 2D shapes, are ing recognition. shown to outperform all other techniques. The main message of this paper is that better pattern Real-life document recognition systems are composed of multiple modules including eld extraction, segmenta- recognition systems can be built by relying more on auto- tion, recognition, and language modeling. A new learning matic learning, and less on hand-designed heuristics. This paradigm, called Graph Transformer Networks (GTN), al- is made possible by recent progress in machine learning lows such multi-module systems to be trained globally using and computer technology. Using character recognition as Gradient-Based methods so as to minimize an overall per- formance measure. a case study, we show that hand-crafted feature extrac- Two systems for on-line handwriting recognition are de- tion can be advantageously replaced by carefully designed scribed. Experiments demonstrate the advantage of global learning machines that operate directly on pixel images. training, and the exibility of Graph Transformer Networks. Using document understanding as a case study, we show A Graph Transformer Network for reading bank check is also described. It uses Convolutional Neural Network char- that the traditional way of building recognition systems by acter recognizers combined with global training techniques manually integrating individually designed modules can be to provides record accuracy on business and personal checks. replaced by a unied and well-principled design paradigm, It is deployed commercially and reads several million checks called Graph Transformer Networks, that allows training per day. Keywords | Neural Networks, OCR, Document Recogni- all the modules to optimize a global performance criterion. tion, Machine Learning, Gradient-Based Learning, Convo- Since the early days of pattern recognition it has been lutional Neural Networks, Graph Transformer Networks, Fi- known that the variability and richness of natural data, nite State Transducers. be it speech, glyphs, or other types of patterns, make it almost impossible to build an accurate recognition system Nomenclature entirely by hand. Consequently, most pattern recognition GT Graph transformer. systems are built using a combination of automatic learn- GTN Graph transformer network. ing techniques and hand-crafted algorithms. The usual HMM Hidden Markov model. method of recognizing individual patterns consists in divid- HOS Heuristic oversegmentation. ing the system into two main modules shown in gure 1. K-NN K-nearest neighbor. The rst module, called the feature extractor, transforms NN Neural network. the input patterns so that they can be represented by low- OCR Optical character recognition. dimensional vectors or short strings of symbols that (a) can PCA Principal component analysis. be easily matched or compared, and (b) are relatively in- RBF Radial basis function. variant with respect to transformations and distortions of RS-SVM Reduced-set support vector method. the input patterns that do not change their nature. The SDNN Space displacement neural network. feature extractor contains most of the prior knowledge and SVM Support vector method. is rather specic to the task. It is also the focus of most of TDNN Time delay neural network. the design e ort, because it is often entirely hand-crafted. V-SVM Virtual support vector method. The classier, on the other hand, is often general-purpose and trainable. One of the main problems with this ap- The authors are with the Speech and Image Pro- proach is that the recognition accuracy is largely deter- cessing Services Research Laboratory, AT&T Labs- mined by the ability of the designer to come up with an Research, 100 Schulz Drive Red Bank, NJ 07701. E-mail: appropriate set of features. This turns out to be a daunt- fyann,leonb,yoshua,ha nerg@research.att.com. Yoshua Bengio ing task which, unfortunately, must be redone for each new is also with the Departement d'Informatique et de Recherche problem. A large amount of the pattern recognition liter- Operationelle, Universite de Montreal, C.P. 6128 Succ. Centre-Ville, 2920 Chemin de la Tour, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C 3J7. ature is devoted to describing and comparing the relative PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 2 Class scores manipulate directed graphs. This leads to the concept of trainable Graph Transformer Network (GTN) also intro- TRAINABLE CLASSIFIER MODULE duced in Section IV. Section V describes the now clas- sical method of heuristic over-segmentation for recogniz- Feature vector ing words or other character strings. Discriminative and non-discriminative gradient-based techniques for training a recognizer at the word level without requiring manual FEATURE EXTRACTION MODULE segmentation and labeling are presented in Section VI. Sec- tion VII presents the promising Space-Displacement Neu- Raw input ral Network approach that eliminates the need for seg- Fig. 1. Traditional pattern recognition is performed with two mod- mentation heuristics by scanning a recognizer at all pos- ules: a xed feature extractor, and a trainable classier. sible locations on the input. In section VIII, it is shown that trainable Graph Transformer Networks can be for- mulated as multiple generalized transductions, based on a merits of di erent feature sets for particular tasks. general graph composition algorithm. The connections be- Historically, the need for appropriate feature extractors tween GTNs and Hidden Markov Models, commonly used was due to the fact that the learning techniques used by in speech recognition is also treated. Section IX describes the classiers were limited to low-dimensional spaces with a globally trained GTN system for recognizing handwrit- easily separable classes 1]. A combination of three factors ing entered in a pen computer. This problem is known as have changed this vision over the last decade. First, the \on-line" handwriting recognition, since the machine must availability of low-cost machines with fast arithmetic units produce immediate feedback as the user writes. The core of allows to rely more on brute-force \numerical" methods the system is a Convolutional Neural Network. The results than on algorithmic renements. Second, the availability clearly demonstrate the advantages of training a recognizer of large databases for problems with a large market and at the word level, rather than training it on pre-segmented, wide interest, such as handwriting recognition, has enabled hand-labeled, isolated characters. Section X describes a designers to rely more on real data and less on hand-crafted complete GTN-based system for reading handwritten and feature extraction to build recognition systems. The third machine-printed bank checks. The core of the system is the and very important factor is the availability of powerful ma- Convolutional Neural Network called LeNet-5 described in chine learning techniques that can handle high-dimensional Section II. This system is in commercial use in the NCR inputs and can generate intricate decision functions when Corporation line of check recognition systems for the bank- fed with these large data sets. It can be argued that the ing industry. It is reading millions of checks per month in recent progress in the accuracy of speech and handwriting several banks across the United States. recognition systems can be attributed in large part to an increased reliance on learning techniques and large training A. Learning from Data data sets. As evidence to this fact, a large proportion of There are several approaches to automatic machine modern commercial OCR systems use some form of multi- learning, but one of the most successful approaches, pop- layer Neural Network trained with back-propagation. ularized in recent years by the neural network community, In this study, we consider the tasks of handwritten char- can be called \numerical" or gradient-based learning. The acter recognition (Sections I and II) and compare the per- learning machine computes a function Y p = F (Z p  W ) formance of several learning techniques on a benchmark where Z p is the p-th input pattern, and W represents the data set for handwritten digit recognition (Section III). collection of adjustable parameters in the system. In a While more automatic learning is benecial, no learning pattern recognition setting, the output Y p may be inter- technique can succeed without a minimal amount of prior preted as the recognized class label of pattern Z p , or as knowledge about the task. In the case of multi-layer neu- scores or probabilities associated with each class. A loss ral networks, a good way to incorporate knowledge is to function E p = D(Dp  F (W Z p )), measures the discrep- tailor its architecture to the task. Convolutional Neu- ancy between Dp , the \correct" or desired output for pat- ral Networks 2] introduced in Section II are an exam- tern Z p , and the output produced by the system. The ple of specialized neural network architectures which in- average loss function Etrain (W ) is the average of the er- corporate knowledge about the invariances of 2D shapes rors E p over a set of labeled examples called the training by using local connection patterns, and by imposing con- set f(Z  D ) ::::(Z P  DP )g. In the simplest setting, the 1 1 straints on the weights. A comparison of several methods learning problem consists in nding the value of W that for isolated handwritten digit recognition is presented in minimizes Etrain (W ). In practice, the performance of the section III. To go from the recognition of individual char- system on a training set is of little interest. The more rel- acters to the recognition of words and sentences in docu- evant measure is the error rate of the system in the eld, ments, the idea of combining multiple modules trained to where it would be used in practice. This performance is reduce the overall error is introduced in Section IV. Rec- estimated by measuring the accuracy on a set of samples ognizing variable-length objects such as handwritten words disjoint from the training set, called the test set. Much using multi-module systems is best done if the modules theoretical and experimental work 3], 4], 5] has shown PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 3 that the gap between the expected error rate on the test Hessian matrix as in Newton or Quasi-Newton methods. set Etest and the error rate on the training set Etrain de- The Conjugate Gradient method 8] can also be used. creases with the number of training samples approximately However, Appendix B shows that despite many claims as to the contrary in the literature, the usefulness of these Etest ; Etrain = k(h=P ) (1) second-order methods to large learning machines is very limited. where P is the number of training samples, h is a measure of A popular minimization procedure is the stochastic gra- \e ective capacity" or complexity of the machine 6], 7],  dient algorithm, also called the on-line update. It consists is a number between 0:5 and 1:0, and k is a constant. This in updating the parameter vector using a noisy, or approx- gap always decreases when the number of training samples imated, version of the average gradient. In the most com- increases. Furthermore, as the capacity h increases, Etrain mon instance of it, W is updated on the basis of a single decreases. Therefore, when increasing the capacity h, there sample: is a trade-o between the decrease of Etrain and the in- pk crease of the gap, with an optimal value of the capacity h Wk = Wk; ;  @E@W(W ) 1 (3) that achieves the lowest generalization error Etest . Most learning algorithms attempt to minimize Etrain as well as With this procedure the parameter vector uctuates some estimate of the gap. A formal version of this is called around an average trajectory, but usually converges consid- structural risk minimization 6], 7], and is based on den- erably faster than regular gradient descent and second or- ing a sequence of learning machines of increasing capacity, der methods on large training sets with redundant samples corresponding to a sequence of subsets of the parameter (such as those encountered in speech or character recogni- space such that each subset is a superset of the previous tion). The reasons for this are explained in Appendix B. subset. In practical terms, Structural Risk Minimization The properties of such algorithms applied to learning have is implemented by minimizing Etrain + H (W ), where the been studied theoretically since the 1960's 9], 10], 11], function H (W ) is called a regularization function, and  is but practical successes for non-trivial tasks did not occur a constant. H (W ) is chosen such that it takes large val- until the mid eighties. ues on parameters W that belong to high-capacity subsets C. Gradient Back-Propagation of the parameter space. Minimizing H (W ) in e ect lim- its the capacity of the accessible subset of the parameter Gradient-Based Learning procedures have been used space, thereby controlling the tradeo between minimiz- since the late 1950's, but they were mostly limited to lin- ing the training error and minimizing the expected gap ear systems 1]. The surprising usefulness of such sim- between the training error and test error. ple gradient descent techniques for complex machine learn- ing tasks was not widely realized until the following three B. Gradient-Based Learning events occurred. The rst event was the realization that, The general problem of minimizing a function with re- despite early warnings to the contrary 12], the presence spect to a set of parameters is at the root of many issues in of local minima in the loss function does not seem to computer science. Gradient-Based Learning draws on the be a major problem in practice. This became apparent fact that it is generally much easier to minimize a reason- when it was noticed that local minima did not seem to ably smooth, continuous function than a discrete (combi- be a major impediment to the success of early non-linear natorial) function. The loss function can be minimized by gradient-based Learning techniques such as Boltzmann ma- estimating the impact of small variations of the parame- chines 13], 14]. The second event was the popularization ter values on the loss function. This is measured by the by Rumelhart, Hinton and Williams 15] and others of a gradient of the loss function with respect to the param- simple and ecient procedure, the back-propagation al- eters. Ecient learning algorithms can be devised when gorithm, to compute the gradient in a non-linear system the gradient vector can be computed analytically (as op- composed of several layers of processing. The third event posed to numerically through perturbations). This is the was the demonstration that the back-propagation proce- basis of numerous gradient-based learning algorithms with dure applied to multi-layer neural networks with sigmoidal continuous-valued parameters. In the procedures described units can solve complicated learning tasks. The basic idea in this article, the set of parameters W is a real-valued vec- of back-propagation is that gradients can be computed e- tor, with respect to which E (W ) is continuous, as well as ciently by propagation from the output to the input. This di erentiable almost everywhere. The simplest minimiza- idea was described in the control theory literature of the tion procedure in such a setting is the gradient descent early sixties 16], but its application to machine learning algorithm where W is iteratively adjusted as follows: was not generally realized then. Interestingly, the early derivations of back-propagation in the context of neural network learning did not use gradients, but \virtual tar- Wk = Wk; ;  @E@W 1 (W ) : (2) gets" for units in intermediate layers 17], 18], or minimal disturbance arguments 19]. The Lagrange formalism used In the simplest case,  is a scalar constant. More sophisti- in the control theory literature provides perhaps the best cated procedures use variable , or substitute it for a diag- rigorous method for deriving back-propagation 20], and for onal matrix, or substitute it for an estimate of the inverse deriving generalizations of back-propagation to recurrent PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 4 networks 21], and networks of heterogeneous modules 22]. ferentiable, and therefore lends itself to the use of Gradient- A simple derivation for generic multi-layer systems is given Based Learning methods. Section V introduces the use of in Section I-E. directed acyclic graphs whose arcs carry numerical infor- The fact that local minima do not seem to be a problem mation as a way to represent the alternative hypotheses, for multi-layer neural networks is somewhat of a theoretical and introduces the idea of GTN. mystery. It is conjectured that if the network is oversized The second solution described in Section VII is to elim- for the task (as is usually the case in practice), the presence inate segmentation altogether. The idea is to sweep the of \extra dimensions" in parameter space reduces the risk recognizer over every possible location on the input image, of unattainable regions. Back-propagation is by far the and to rely on the \character spotting" property of the rec- most widely used neural-network learning algorithm, and ognizer, i.e. its ability to correctly recognize a well-centered probably the most widely used learning algorithm of any character in its input eld, even in the presence of other form. characters besides it, while rejecting images containing no centered characters 26], 27]. The sequence of recognizer D. Learning in Real Handwriting Recognition Systems outputs obtained by sweeping the recognizer over the in- Isolated handwritten character recognition has been ex- put is then fed to a Graph Transformer Network that takes tensively studied in the literature (see 23], 24] for reviews), linguistic constraints into account and nally extracts the and was one of the early successful applications of neural most likely interpretation. This GTN is somewhat similar networks 25]. Comparative experiments on recognition of to Hidden Markov Models (HMM), which makes the ap- individual handwritten digits are reported in Section III. proach reminiscent of the classical speech recognition 28], They show that neural networks trained with Gradient- 29]. While this technique would be quite expensive in Based Learning perform better than all other methods the general case, the use of Convolutional Neural Networks tested here on the same data. The best neural networks, makes it particularly attractive because it allows signicant called Convolutional Networks, are designed to learn to savings in computational cost. extract relevant features directly from pixel images (see Section II). E. Globally Trainable Systems One of the most dicult problems in handwriting recog- As stated earlier, most practical pattern recognition sys- nition, however, is not only to recognize individual charac- tems are composed of multiple modules. For example, a ters, but also to separate out characters from their neigh- document recognition system is composed of a eld locator, bors within the word or sentence, a process known as seg- which extracts regions of interest, a eld segmenter, which mentation. The technique for doing this that has become cuts the input image into images of candidate characters, a the \standard" is called Heuristic Over-Segmentation. It recognizer, which classies and scores each candidate char- consists in generating a large number of potential cuts acter, and a contextual post-processor, generally based on between characters using heuristic image processing tech- a stochastic grammar, which selects the best grammatically niques, and subsequently selecting the best combination of correct answer from the hypotheses generated by the recog- cuts based on scores given for each candidate character by nizer. In most cases, the information carried from module the recognizer. In such a model, the accuracy of the sys- to module is best represented as graphs with numerical in- tem depends upon the quality of the cuts generated by the formation attached to the arcs. For example, the output heuristics, and on the ability of the recognizer to distin- of the recognizer module can be represented as an acyclic guish correctly segmented characters from pieces of char- graph where each arc contains the label and the score of acters, multiple characters, or otherwise incorrectly seg- a candidate character, and where each path represent a mented characters. Training a recognizer to perform this alternative interpretation of the input string. Typically, task poses a major challenge because of the diculty in cre- each module is manually optimized, or sometimes trained, ating a labeled database of incorrectly segmented charac- outside of its context. For example, the character recog- ters. The simplest solution consists in running the images nizer would be trained on labeled images of pre-segmented of character strings through the segmenter, and then man- characters. Then the complete system is assembled, and ually labeling all the character hypotheses. Unfortunately, a subset of the parameters of the modules is manually ad- not only is this an extremely tedious and costly task, it is justed to maximize the overall performance. This last step also dicult to do the labeling consistently. For example, is extremely tedious, time-consuming, and almost certainly should the right half of a cut up 4 be labeled as a 1 or as suboptimal. a non-character? should the right half of a cut up 8 be A better alternative would be to somehow train the en- labeled as a 3? tire system so as to minimize a global error measure such as The rst solution, described in Section V consists in the probability of character misclassications at the docu- training the system at the level of whole strings of char- ment level. Ideally, we would want to nd a good minimum acters, rather than at the character level. The notion of of this global loss function with respect to all the param- Gradient-Based Learning can be used for this purpose. The eters in the system. If the loss function E measuring the system is trained to minimize an overall loss function which performance can be made di erentiable with respect to the measures the probability of an erroneous answer. Section V system's tunable parameters W , we can nd a local min- explores various ways to ensure that the loss function is dif- imum of E using Gradient-Based Learning. However, at PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 5 rst glance, it appears that the sheer size and complexity tion system is best represented by graphs with numerical of the system would make this intractable. information attached to the arcs. In this case, each module, To ensure that the global loss function E p (Z p  W ) is dif- called a Graph Transformer, takes one or more graphs as ferentiable, the overall system is built as a feed-forward net- input, and produces a graph as output. Networks of such work of di erentiable modules. The function implemented modules are called Graph Transformer Networks (GTN). by each module must be continuous and di erentiable al- Sections IV, VI and VIII develop the concept of GTNs, most everywhere with respect to the internal parameters of and show that Gradient-Based Learning can be used to the module (e.g. the weights of a Neural Net character rec- train all the parameters in all the modules so as to mini- ognizer in the case of a character recognition module), and mize a global loss function. It may seem paradoxical that with respect to the module's inputs. If this is the case, a gradients can be computed when the state information is simple generalization of the well-known back-propagation represented by essentially discrete objects such as graphs, procedure can be used to eciently compute the gradients but that diculty can be circumvented, as shown later. of the loss function with respect to all the parameters in the system 22]. For example, let us consider a system II. Convolutional Neural Networks for built as a cascade of modules, each of which implements a Isolated Character Recognition function Xn = Fn (Wn  Xn; ), where Xn is a vector rep- 1 The ability of multi-layer networks trained with gradi- resenting the output of the module, Wn is the vector of ent descent to learn complex, high-dimensional, non-linear tunable parameters in the module (a subset of W ), and mappings from large collections of examples makes them Xn; is the module's input vector (as well as the previous 1 obvious candidates for image recognition tasks. In the tra- module's output vector). The input X to the rst module ditional model of pattern recognition, a hand-designed fea- is the input pattern Z p . If the partial derivative of E p with 0 ture extractor gathers relevant information from the input respect to Xn is known, then the partial derivatives of E p and eliminates irrelevant variabilities. A trainable classier with respect to Wn and Xn; can be computed using the 1 then categorizes the resulting feature vectors into classes. backward recurrence In this scheme, standard, fully-connected multi-layer net- @E p = @F (W  X ) @E p works can be used as classiers. A potentially more inter- @Wn @W n n; @Xn 1 esting scheme is to rely on as much as possible on learning @E p = @F (W  X ) @E p in the feature extractor itself. In the case of character @Xn; @X n n; @Xn 1 (4) recognition, a network could be fed with almost raw in- puts (e.g. size-normalized images). While this can be done 1 where @W@F (Wn  Xn; ) is the Jacobian of F with respect to 1 with an ordinary fully connected feed-forward network with W evaluated at the point (Wn  Xn; ), and @X 1 @F (Wn  Xn; ) 1 some success for tasks such as character recognition, there is the Jacobian of F with respect to X . The Jacobian of are problems. a vector function is a matrix containing the partial deriva- Firstly, typical images are large, often with several hun- tives of all the outputs with respect to all the inputs. dred variables (pixels). A fully-connected rst layer with, The rst equation computes some terms of the gradient say one hundred hidden units in the rst layer, would al- of E p (W ), while the second equation generates a back- ready contain several tens of thousands of weights. Such ward recurrence, as in the well-known back-propagation a large number of parameters increases the capacity of the procedure for neural networks. We can average the gradi- system and therefore requires a larger training set. In ad- ents over the training patterns to obtain the full gradient. dition, the memory requirement to store so many weights It is interesting to note that in many instances there is may rule out certain hardware implementations. But, the no need to explicitly compute the Jacobian matrix. The main deciency of unstructured nets for image or speech above formula uses the product of the Jacobian with a vec- applications is that they have no built-in invariance with tor of partial derivatives, and it is often easier to compute respect to translations, or local distortions of the inputs. this product directly without computing the Jacobian be- Before being sent to the xed-size input layer of a neural forehand. In By analogy with ordinary multi-layer neural net, character images, or other 2D or 1D signals, must be networks, all but the last module are called hidden layers approximately size-normalized and centered in the input because their outputs are not observable from the outside. eld. Unfortunately, no such preprocessing can be perfect: more complex situations than the simple cascade of mod- handwriting is often normalized at the word level, which ules described above, the partial derivative notation be- can cause size, slant, and position variations for individual comes somewhat ambiguous and awkward. A completely characters. This, combined with variability in writing style, rigorous derivation in more general cases can be done using will cause variations in the position of distinctive features Lagrange functions 20], 21], 22]. in input objects. In principle, a fully-connected network of Traditional multi-layer neural networks are a special case sucient size could learn to produce outputs that are in- of the above where the state information Xn is represented variant with respect to such variations. However, learning with xed-sized vectors, and where the modules are al- such a task would probably result in multiple units with ternated layers of matrix multiplications (the weights) and similar weight patterns positioned at various locations in component-wise sigmoid functions (the neurons). However, the input so as to detect distinctive features wherever they as stated earlier, the state information in complex recogni- appear on the input. Learning these weight congurations PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 6 requires a very large number of training instances to cover planes, each of which is a feature map. A unit in a feature the space of possible variations. In convolutional networks, map has 25 inputs connected to a 5 by 5 area in the input, described below, shift invariance is automatically obtained called the receptive eld of the unit. Each unit has 25 in- by forcing the replication of weight congurations across puts, and therefore 25 trainable coecients plus a trainable space. bias. The receptive elds of contiguous units in a feature Secondly, a deciency of fully-connected architectures is map are centered on correspondingly contiguous units in that the topology of the input is entirely ignored. The in- the previous layer. Therefore receptive elds of neighbor- put variables can be presented in any (xed) order without ing units overlap. For example, in the rst hidden layer a ecting the outcome of the training. On the contrary, of LeNet-5, the receptive elds of horizontally contiguous images (or time-frequency representations of speech) have units overlap by 4 columns and 5 rows. As stated earlier, a strong 2D local structure: variables (or pixels) that are all the units in a feature map share the same set of 25 spatially or temporally nearby are highly correlated. Local weights and the same bias so they detect the same feature correlations are the reasons for the well-known advantages at all possible locations on the input. The other feature of extracting and combining local features before recogniz- maps in the layer use di erent sets of weights and biases, ing spatial or temporal objects, because congurations of thereby extracting di erent types of local features. In the neighboring variables can be classied into a small number case of LeNet-5, at each input location six di erent types of categories (e.g. edges, corners...). Convolutional Net- of features are extracted by six units in identical locations works force the extraction of local features by restricting in the six feature maps. A sequential implementation of the receptive elds of hidden units to be local. a feature map would scan the input image with a single unit that has a local receptive eld, and store the states A. Convolutional Networks of this unit at corresponding locations in the feature map. Convolutional Networks combine three architectural This operation is equivalent to a convolution, followed by ideas to ensure some degree of shift, scale, and distor- an additive bias and squashing function, hence the name tion invariance: local receptive elds, shared weights (or convolutional network. The kernel of the convolution is the weight replication), and spatial or temporal sub-sampling. set of connection weights used by the units in the feature A typical convolutional network for recognizing characters, map. An interesting property of convolutional layers is that dubbed LeNet-5, is shown in gure 2. The input plane if the input image is shifted, the feature map output will receives images of characters that are approximately size- be shifted by the same amount, but will be left unchanged normalized and centered. Each unit in a layer receives in- otherwise. This property is at the basis of the robustness puts from a set of units located in a small neighborhood of convolutional networks to shifts and distortions of the in the previous layer. The idea of connecting units to local input. receptive elds on the input goes back to the Perceptron in Once a feature has been detected, its exact location the early 60s, and was almost simultaneous with Hubel and becomes less important. Only its approximate position Wiesel's discovery of locally-sensitive, orientation-selective relative to other features is relevant. For example, once neurons in the cat's visual system 30]. Local connections we know that the input image contains the endpoint of a have been used many times in neural models of visual learn- roughly horizontal segment in the upper left area, a corner ing 31], 32], 18], 33], 34], 2]. With local receptive in the upper right area, and the endpoint of a roughly ver- elds, neurons can extract elementary visual features such tical segment in the lower portion of the image, we can tell as oriented edges, end-points, corners (or similar features in the input image is a 7. Not only is the precise position of other signals such as speech spectrograms). These features each of those features irrelevant for identifying the pattern, are then combined by the subsequent layers in order to de- it is potentially harmful because the positions are likely to tect higher-order features. As stated earlier, distortions or vary for di erent instances of the character. A simple way shifts of the input can cause the position of salient features to reduce the precision with which the position of distinc- to vary. In addition, elementary feature detectors that are tive features are encoded in a feature map is to reduce the useful on one part of the image are likely to be useful across spatial resolution of the feature map. This can be achieved the entire image. This knowledge can be applied by forcing with a so-called sub-sampling layers which performs a local a set of units, whose receptive elds are located at di erent averaging and a sub-sampling, reducing the resolution of places on the image, to have identical weight vectors 32], the feature map, and reducing the sensitivity of the output 15], 34]. Units in a layer are organized in planes within to shifts and distortions. The second hidden layer of LeNet- which all the units share the same set of weights. The set 5 is a sub-sampling layer. This layer comprises six feature of outputs of the units in such a plane is called a feature maps, one for each feature map in the previous layer. The map. Units in a feature map are all constrained to per- receptive eld of each unit is a 2 by 2 area in the previous form the same operation on di erent parts of the image. layer's corresponding feature map. Each unit computes the A complete convolutional layer is composed of several fea- average of its four inputs, multiplies it by a trainable coef- ture maps (with di erent weight vectors), so that multiple cient, adds a trainable bias, and passes the result through features can be extracted at each location. A concrete ex- a sigmoid function. Contiguous units have non-overlapping ample of this is the rst layer of LeNet-5 shown in Figure 2. contiguous receptive elds. Consequently, a sub-sampling Units in the rst hidden layer of LeNet-5 are organized in 6 layer feature map has half the number of rows and columns PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 7 C3: f. maps 16@10x10 C1: feature maps S4: f. maps 16@5x5 INPUT 6@28x28 32x32 S2: f. maps C5: layer F6: layer OUTPUT 6@14x14 120 10 84 Full connection Gaussian connections Convolutions Subsampling Convolutions Subsampling Full connection Fig. 2. Architecture of LeNet-5, a Convolutional Neural Network, here for digits recognition. Each plane is a feature map, i.e. a set of units whose weights are constrained to be identical. as the feature maps in the previous layer. The trainable B. LeNet-5 coecient and bias control the e ect of the sigmoid non- linearity. If the coecient is small, then the unit operates This section describes in more detail the architecture of in a quasi-linear mode, and the sub-sampling layer merely LeNet-5, the Convolutional Neural Network used in the blurs the input. If the coecient is large, sub-sampling experiments. LeNet-5 comprises 7 layers, not counting the units can be seen as performing a \noisy OR" or a \noisy input, all of which contain trainable parameters (weights). AND" function depending on the value of the bias. Succes- The input is a 32x32 pixel image. This is signicantly larger sive layers of convolutions and sub-sampling are typically than the largest character in the database (at most 20x20 alternated, resulting in a \bi-pyramid": at each layer, the pixels centered in a 28x28 eld). The reason is that it is number of feature maps is increased as the spatial resolu- desirable that potential distinctive features such as stroke tion is decreased. Each unit in the third hidden layer in g- end-points or corner can appear in the center of the recep- ure 2 may have input connections from several feature maps tive eld of the highest-level feature detectors. In LeNet-5 in the previous layer. The convolution/sub-sampling com- the set of centers of the receptive elds of the last convolu- bination, inspired by Hubel and Wiesel's notions of \sim- tional layer (C3, see below) form a 20x20 area in the center ple" and \complex" cells, was implemented in Fukushima's of the 32x32 input. The values of the input pixels are nor- Neocognitron 32], though no globally supervised learning malized so that the background level (white) corresponds procedure such as back-propagation was available then. A to a value of -0.1 and the foreground (black) corresponds large degree of invariance to geometric transformations of to 1.175. This makes the mean input roughly 0, and the the input can be achieved with this progressive reduction variance roughly 1 which accelerates learning 46]. of spatial resolution compensated by a progressive increase In the following, convolutional layers are labeled Cx, sub- of the richness of the representation (the number of feature sampling layers are labeled Sx, and fully-connected layers maps). are labeled Fx, where x is the layer index. Since all the weights are learned with back-propagation, Layer C1 is a convolutional layer with 6 feature maps. convolutional networks can be seen as synthesizing their Each unit in each feature map is connected to a 5x5 neigh- own feature extractor. The weight sharing technique has borhood in the input. The size of the feature maps is 28x28 the interesting side e ect of reducing the number of free which prevents connection from the input from falling o parameters, thereby reducing the \capacity" of the ma- the boundary. C1 contains 156 trainable parameters, and chine and reducing the gap between test error and training 122,304 connections. error 34]. The network in gure 2 contains 340,908 con- Layer S2 is a sub-sampling layer with 6 feature maps of nections, but only 60,000 trainable free parameters because size 14x14. Each unit in each feature map is connected to a of the weight sharing. 2x2 neighborhood in the corresponding feature map in C1. Fixed-size Convolutional Networks have been applied The four inputs to a unit in S2 are added, then multiplied to many applications, among other handwriting recogni- by a trainable coecient, and added to a trainable bias. tion 35], 36], machine-printed character recognition 37], The result is passed through a sigmoidal function. The on-line handwriting recognition 38], and face recogni- 2x2 receptive elds are non-overlapping, therefore feature tion 39]. Fixed-size convolutional networks that share maps in S2 have half the number of rows and column as weights along a single temporal dimension are known as feature maps in C1. Layer S2 has 12 trainable parameters Time-Delay Neural Networks (TDNNs). TDNNs have been and 5,880 connections. used in phoneme recognition (without sub-sampling) 40], Layer C3 is a convolutional layer with 16 feature maps. 41], spoken word recognition (with sub-sampling) 42], Each unit in each feature map is connected to several 5x5 43], on-line recognition of isolated handwritten charac- neighborhoods at identical locations in a subset of S2's ters 44], and signature verication 45]. feature maps. Table I shows the set of S2 feature maps PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 8 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 where A is the amplitude of the function and S determines 0 X X X X X X X X X X its slope at the origin. The function f is odd, with horizon- 1 X X X X X X X X X X tal asymptotes at +A and ;A. The constant A is chosen 2 X X X X X X X X X X to be 1:7159. The rationale for this choice of a squashing 3 X X X X X X X X X X function is given in Appendix A. 4 X X X X X X X X X X Finally, the output layer is composed of Euclidean Radial 5 X X X X X X X X X X Basis Function units (RBF), one for each class, with 84 TABLE I inputs each. The outputs of each RBF unit yi is computed Each column indicates which feature map in S2 are combined as follows: X yi = (xj ; wij ) : 2 (7) by the units in a particular feature map of C3. j In other words, each output RBF unit computes the Eu- clidean distance between its input vector and its parameter combined by each C3 feature map. Why not connect ev- vector. The further away is the input from the parameter ery S2 feature map to every C3 feature map? The rea- vector, the larger is the RBF output. The output of a son is twofold. First, a non-complete connection scheme particular RBF can be interpreted as a penalty term mea- keeps the number of connections within reasonable bounds. suring the t between the input pattern and a model of the More importantly, it forces a break of symmetry in the net- class associated with the RBF. In probabilistic terms, the work. Di erent feature maps are forced to extract di erent RBF output can be interpreted as the unnormalized nega- (hopefully complementary) features because they get dif- tive log-likelihood of a Gaussian distribution in the space ferent sets of inputs. The rationale behind the connection of congurations of layer F6. Given an input pattern, the scheme in table I is the following. The rst six C3 feature loss function should be designed so as to get the congu- maps take inputs from every contiguous subsets of three ration of F6 as close as possible to the parameter vector feature maps in S2. The next six take input from every of the RBF that corresponds to the pattern's desired class. contiguous subset of four. The next three take input from The parameter vectors of these units were chosen by hand some discontinuous subsets of four. Finally the last one and kept xed (at least initially). The components of those takes input from all S2 feature maps. Layer C3 has 1,516 parameters vectors were set to -1 or +1. While they could trainable parameters and 151,600 connections. have been chosen at random with equal probabilities for -1 Layer S4 is a sub-sampling layer with 16 feature maps of and +1, or even chosen to form an error correcting code size 5x5. Each unit in each feature map is connected to a as suggested by 47], they were instead designed to repre- 2x2 neighborhood in the corresponding feature map in C3, sent a stylized image of the corresponding character class in a similar way as C1 and S2. Layer S4 has 32 trainable drawn on a 7x12 bitmap (hence the number 84). Such a parameters and 2,000 connections. representation is not particularly useful for recognizing iso- Layer C5 is a convolutional layer with 120 feature maps. lated digits, but it is quite useful for recognizing strings of Each unit is connected to a 5x5 neighborhood on all 16 characters taken from the full printable ASCII set. The of S4's feature maps. Here, because the size of S4 is also rationale is that characters that are similar, and therefore 5x5, the size of C5's feature maps is 1x1: this amounts confusable, such as uppercase O, lowercase O, and zero, or to a full connection between S4 and C5. C5 is labeled lowercase l, digit 1, square brackets, and uppercase I, will as a convolutional layer, instead of a fully-connected layer, have similar output codes. This is particularly useful if the because if LeNet-5 input were made bigger with everything system is combined with a linguistic post-processor that else kept constant, the feature map dimension would be can correct such confusions. Because the codes for confus- larger than 1x1. This process of dynamically increasing the able classes are similar, the output of the corresponding size of a convolutional network is described in the section RBFs for an ambiguous character will be similar, and the Section VII. Layer C5 has 48,120 trainable connections. post-processor will be able to pick the appropriate interpre- Layer F6, contains 84 units (the reason for this number tation. Figure 3 gives the output codes for the full ASCII comes from the design of the output layer, explained be- set. low) and is fully connected to C5. It has 10,164 trainable Another reason for using such distributed codes, rather parameters. than the more common \1 of N" code (also called place As in classical neural networks, units in layers up to F6 code, or grand-mother cell code) for the outputs is that compute a dot product between their input vector and their non distributed codes tend to behave badly when the num- weight vector, to which a bias is added. This weighted sum, ber of classes is larger than a few dozens. The reason is denoted ai for unit i, is then passed through a sigmoid that output units in a non-distributed code must be o squashing function to produce the state of unit i, denoted most of the time. This is quite dicult to achieve with by xi : sigmoid units. Yet another reason is that the classiers are xi = f (ai ) (5) often used to not only recognize characters, but also to re- The squashing function is a scaled hyperbolic tangent: ject non-characters. RBFs with distributed codes are more appropriate for that purpose because unlike sigmoids, they f (a) = A tanh(Sa) (6) are activated within a well circumscribed region of their in- PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 9 penalties, it means that in addition to pushing down the ! " # $ % & ’ ( ) * + , − . / penalty of the correct class like the MSE criterion, this criterion also pulls up the penalties of the incorrect classes: XP (y (Z p W ) + log(e j + X e y Z W )) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @ A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O E (W ) = P1 Dp ; ; i( p ) p =1 i (9) P Q R S T U V W X Y Z [ \ ] ^ _ ‘ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o The negative of the second term plays a \competitive" role. It is necessarily smaller than (or equal to) the rst term, p q r s t u v w x y z { | } ~ therefore this loss function is positive. The constant j is Fig. 3. Initial parameters of the output RBFs for recognizing the positive, and prevents the penalties of classes that are al- full ASCII set. ready very large from being pushed further up. The pos- terior probability of this P rubbish class label would be the put space that non-typical patterns are more likely to fall ratio of e;j and e;j + i e;yi Z p W . This discrimina- ( ) outside of. tive criterion prevents the previously mentioned \collaps- The parameter vectors of the RBFs play the role of target ing e ect" when the RBF parameters are learned because vectors for layer F6. It is worth pointing out that the com- it keeps the RBF centers apart from each other. In Sec- ponents of those vectors are +1 or -1, which is well within tion VI, we present a generalization of this criterion for the range of the sigmoid of F6, and therefore prevents those systems that learn to classify multiple objects in the input sigmoids from getting saturated. In fact, +1 and -1 are the (e.g., characters in words or in documents). points of maximum curvature of the sigmoids. This forces Computing the gradient of the loss function with respect the F6 units to operate in their maximally non-linear range. to all the weights in all the layers of the convolutional Saturation of the sigmoids must be avoided because it is network is done with back-propagation. The standard al- known to lead to slow convergence and ill-conditioning of gorithm must be slightly modied to take account of the the loss function. weight sharing. An easy way to implement it is to rst com- pute the partial derivatives of the loss function with respect C. Loss Function to each connection, as if the network were a conventional multi-layer network without weight sharing. Then the par- The simplest output loss function that can be used with tial derivatives of all the connections that share a same the above network is the Maximum Likelihood Estimation parameter are added to form the derivative with respect to criterion (MLE), which in our case is equivalent to the Min- that parameter. imum Mean Squared Error (MSE). The criterion for a set Such a large architecture can be trained very eciently, of training samples is simply: but doing so requires the use of a few techniques that are E (W ) = P1 XP y (Z p W ) (8) described in the appendix. Section A of the appendix describes details such as the particular sigmoid used, and Dp p the weight initialization. Section B and C describe the minimization procedure used, which is a stochastic version =1 where yDp is the output of the Dp -th RBF unit, i.e. the of a diagonal approximation to the Levenberg-Marquardt one that corresponds to the correct class of input pattern procedure. Z p . While this cost function is appropriate for most cases, III. Results and Comparison with Other it lacks three important properties. First, if we allow the parameters of the RBF to adapt, E (W ) has a trivial, but Methods totally unacceptable, solution. In this solution, all the RBF While recognizing individual digits is only one of many parameter vectors are equal, and the state of F6 is constant problems involved in designing a practical recognition sys- and equal to that parameter vector. In this case the net- tem, it is an excellent benchmark for comparing shape work happily ignores the input, and all the RBF outputs recognition methods. Though many existing method com- are equal to zero. This collapsing phenomenon does not bine a hand-crafted feature extractor and a trainable clas- occur if the RBF weights are not allowed to adapt. The sier, this study concentrates on adaptive methods that second problem is that there is no competition between operate directly on size-normalized images. the classes. Such a competition can be obtained by us- ing a more discriminative training criterion, dubbed the A. Database: the Modied NIST set MAP (maximum a posteriori) criterion, similar to Maxi- The database used to train and test the systems de- mum Mutual Information criterion sometimes used to train scribed in this paper was constructed from the NIST's Spe- HMMs 48], 49], 50]. It corresponds to maximizing the cial Database 3 and Special Database 1 containing binary posterior probability of the correct class Dp (or minimiz- images of handwritten digits. NIST originally designated ing the logarithm of the probability of the correct class), SD-3 as their training set and SD-1 as their test set. How- given that the input image can come from one of the classes ever, SD-3 is much cleaner and easier to recognize than SD- or from a background \rubbish" class label. In terms of 1. The reason for this can be found on the fact that SD-3 PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 10 was collected among Census Bureau employees, while SD-1 was collected among high-school students. Drawing sensi- ble conclusions from learning experiments requires that the result be independent of the choice of training set and test among the complete set of samples. Therefore it was nec- essary to build a new database by mixing NIST's datasets. SD-1 contains 58,527 digit images written by 500 dif- ferent writers. In contrast to SD-3, where blocks of data from each writer appeared in sequence, the data in SD-1 is scrambled. Writer identities for SD-1 are available and we used this information to unscramble the writers. We then split SD-1 in two: characters written by the rst 250 writers went into our new training set. The remaining 250 writers were placed in our test set. Thus we had two sets with nearly 30,000 examples each. The new training set was completed with enough examples from SD-3, starting at pattern # 0, to make a full set of 60,000 training patterns. Similarly, the new test set was completed with SD-3 exam- ples starting at pattern # 35,000 to make a full set with Fig. 4. Size-normalized examples from the MNIST database. 60,000 test patterns. In the experiments described here, we only used a subset of 10,000 test images (5,000 from SD-1 and 5,000 from SD-3), but we used the full 60,000 training three, 0.0001 for the next three, 0.00005 for the next 4, samples. The resulting database was called the Modied and 0.00001 thereafter. Before each iteration, the diagonal NIST, or MNIST, dataset. Hessian approximation was reevaluated on 500 samples, as The original black and white (bilevel) images were size described in Appendix C and kept xed during the entire normalized to t in a 20x20 pixel box while preserving iteration. The parameter was set to 0.02. The resulting their aspect ratio. The resulting images contain grey lev- e ective learning rates during the rst pass varied between els as result of the anti-aliasing (image interpolation) tech- approximately 7  10; and 0:016 over the set of parame- 5 nique used by the normalization algorithm. Three ver- ters. The test error rate stabilizes after around 10 passes sions of the database were used. In the rst version, through the training set at 0.95%. The error rate on the the images were centered in a 28x28 image by comput- training set reaches 0.35% after 19 passes. Many authors ing the center of mass of the pixels, and translating the have reported observing the common phenomenon of over- image so as to position this point at the center of the training when training neural networks or other adaptive 28x28 eld. In some instances, this 28x28 eld was ex- algorithms on various tasks. When over-training occurs, tended to 32x32 with background pixels. This version of the training error keeps decreasing over time, but the test the database will be referred to as the regular database. error goes through a minimum and starts increasing after In the second version of the database, the character im- a certain number of iterations. While this phenomenon is ages were deslanted and cropped down to 20x20 pixels im- very common, it was not observed in our case as the learn- ages. The deslanting computes the second moments of in- ing curves in gure 5 show. A possible reason is that the ertia of the pixels (counting a foreground pixel as 1 and a learning rate was kept relatively large. The e ect of this is background pixel as 0), and shears the image by horizon- that the weights never settle down in the local minimum tally shifting the lines so that the principal axis is verti- but keep oscillating randomly. Because of those uctua- cal. This version of the database will be referred to as the tions, the average cost will be lower in a broader minimum. deslanted database. In the third version of the database, Therefore, stochastic gradient will have a similar e ect as used in some early experiments, the images were reduced a regularization term that favors broader minima. Broader to 16x16 pixels. The regular database (60,000 training minima correspond to solutions with large entropy of the examples, 10,000 test examples size-normalized to 20x20, parameter distribution, which is benecial to the general- and centered by center of mass in 28x28 elds) is avail- ization error. able at http://www.research.att.com/~yann/ocr/mnist. The inuence of the training set size was measured by Figure 4 shows examples randomly picked from the test set. training the network with 15,000, 30,000, and 60,000 exam- ples. The resulting training error and test error are shown B. Results in gure 6. It is clear that, even with specialized architec- Several versions of LeNet-5 were trained on the regular tures such as LeNet-5, more training data would improve MNIST database. 20 iterations through the entire train- the accuracy. ing data were performed for each session. The values of To verify this hypothesis, we articially generated more the global learning rate (see Equation 21 in Appendix C training examples by randomly distorting the original for a denition) was decreased using the following sched- training images. The increased training set was composed ule: 0.0005 for the rst two passes, 0.0002 for the next of the 60,000 original patterns plus 540,000 instances of PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 11 Error Rate (%) 5% 4% 3% 2% 1% Test 0% Training 0 4 8 12 16 20 Training set Iterations Fig. 5. Training and test error of LeNet-5 as a function of the num- ber of passes through the 60,000 pattern training set (without distortions). The average training error is measured on-the-y as training proceeds. This explains why the training error appears to be larger than the test error. Convergence is attained after 10 to 12 passes through the training set. Fig. 7. Examples of distortions of ten training patterns. Error Rate (%) 1.8 1.6 4−>6 3−>5 8−>2 2−>1 5−>3 4−>8 2−>8 3−>5 6−>5 7−>3 1.4 9−>4 8−>0 7−>8 5−>3 8−>7 0−>6 3−>7 2−>7 8−>3 9−>4 Test error (no distortions) 1.2 8−>2 5−>3 4−>8 3−>9 6−>0 9−>8 4−>9 6−>1 9−>4 9−>1 1 9−>4 2−>0 6−>1 3−>5 3−>2 9−>5 6−>0 6−>0 6−>0 6−>8 0.8 Test error 4−>6 7−>3 9−>4 4−>6 2−>7 9−>7 4−>3 9−>4 9−>4 9−>4 (with distortions) 0.6 8−>7 4−>2 8−>4 3−>5 8−>4 6−>5 8−>5 3−>8 3−>8 9−>8 0.4 0.2 Training error (no distortions) 1−>5 9−>8 6−>3 0−>2 6−>5 9−>5 0−>7 1−>6 4−>9 2−>1 0 2−>8 8−>5 4−>9 7−>2 7−>2 6−>5 9−>7 6−>1 5−>6 5−>0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Training Set Size (x1000) 4−>9 2−>8 Fig. 6. Training and test errors of LeNet-5 achieved using training sets of various sizes. This graph suggests that a larger training Fig. 8. The 82 test patterns misclassied by LeNet-5. Below each set could improve the performance of LeNet-5. The hollow square image is displayed the correct answers (left) and the network an- show the test error when more training patterns are articially swer (right). These errors are mostly caused either by genuinely generated using random distortions. The test patterns are not ambiguous patterns, or by digits written in a style that are under- distorted. represented in the training set. distorted patterns with randomly picked distortion param- perfectly identiable by humans, although they are writ- eters. The distortions were combinations of the follow- ten in an under-represented style. This shows that further ing planar ane transformations: horizontal and verti- improvements are to be expected with more training data. cal translations, scaling, squeezing (simultaneous horizon- C. Comparison with Other Classiers tal compression and vertical elongation, or the reverse), and horizontal shearing. Figure 7 shows examples of dis- For the sake of comparison, a variety of other trainable torted patterns used for training. When distorted data was classiers was trained and tested on the same database. An used for training, the test error rate dropped to 0.8% (from early subset of these results was presented in 51]. The error 0.95% without deformation). The same training parame- rates on the test set for the various methods are shown in ters were used as without deformations. The total length of gure 9. the training session was left unchanged (20 passes of 60,000 patterns each). It is interesting to note that the network C.1 Linear Classier, and Pairwise Linear Classier e ectively sees each individual sample only twice over the Possibly the simplest classier that one might consider is course of these 20 passes. a linear classier. Each input pixel value contributes to a Figure 8 shows all 82 misclassied test examples. some weighted sum for each output unit. The output unit with of those examples are genuinely ambiguous, but several are the highest sum (including the contribution of a bias con- PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 12 Linear −−−− 12.0 −−−−> [deslant] Linear −−−− 8.4 −−−−> Pairwise −−−− 7.6 −−−−> K−NN Euclidean 5 [deslant] K−NN Euclidean 2.4 40 PCA + quadratic 3.3 1000 RBF + linear 3.6 [16x16] Tangent Distance 1.1 SVM poly 4 1.1 RS−SVM poly 5 1 [dist] V−SVM poly 9 0.8 28x28−300−10 4.7 [dist] 28x28−300−10 3.6 [deslant] 20x20−300−10 1.6 28x28−1000−10 4.5 [dist] 28x28−1000−10 3.8 28x28−300−100−10 3.05 [dist] 28x28−300−100−10 2.5 28x28−500−150−10 2.95 [dist] 28x28−500−150−10 2.45 [16x16] LeNet−1 1.7 LeNet−4 1.1 LeNet−4 / Local 1.1 LeNet−4 / K−NN 1.1 LeNet−5 0.95 [dist] LeNet−5 0.8 [dist] Boosted LeNet−4 0.7 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 Fig. 9. Error rate on the test set (%) for various classication methods. deslant] indicates that the classier was trained and tested on the deslanted version of the database. dist] indicates that the training set was augmented with articially distorted examples. 16x16] indicates that the system used the 16x16 pixel images. The uncertainty in the quoted error rates is about 0.1%. stant) indicates the class of the input character. On the However, the memory requirement and recognition time are regular data, the error rate is 12%. The network has 7850 large: the complete 60,000 twenty by twenty pixel training free parameters. On the deslanted images, the test error images (about 24 Megabytes at one byte per pixel) must be rate is 8.4% The network has 4010 free parameters. The available at run time. Much more compact representations deciencies of the linear classier are well documented 1] could be devised with modest increase in error rate. On the and it is included here simply to form a basis of comparison regular test set the error rate was 5.0%. On the deslanted for more sophisticated classiers. Various combinations of data, the error rate was 2.4%, with k = 3. Naturally, a sigmoid units, linear units, gradient descent learning, and realistic Euclidean distance nearest-neighbor system would learning by directly solving linear systems gave similar re- operate on feature vectors rather than directly on the pix- sults. els, but since all of the other systems presented in this A simple improvement of the basic linear classier was study operate directly on the pixels, this result is useful for tested 52]. The idea is to train each unit of a single-layer a baseline comparison. network to separate each class from each other class. In our case this layer comprises 45 units labeled 0/1, 0/2,...0/9, C.3 Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Polynomial 1/2....8/9. Unit i=j is trained to produce +1 on patterns Classier of class i, -1 on patterns of class j , and is not trained on Following 53], 54], a preprocessing stage was con- other patterns. The nal score for class i is the sum of structed which computes the projection of the input pat- the outputs all the units labeled i=x minus the sum of the tern on the 40 principal components of the set of training output of all the units labeled y=i, for all x and y. The vectors. To compute the principal components, the mean of error rate on the regular test set was 7.6%. each input component was rst computed and subtracted from the training vectors. The covariance matrix of the re- C.2 Baseline Nearest Neighbor Classier sulting vectors was then computed and diagonalized using Another simple classier is a K-nearest neighbor classi- Singular Value Decomposition. The 40-dimensional feature er with a Euclidean distance measure between input im- vector was used as the input of a second degree polynomial ages. This classier has the advantage that no training classier. This classier can be seen as a linear classier time, and no brain on the part of the designer, are required. with 821 inputs, preceded by a module that computes all PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 13 products of pairs of input variables. The error on the reg- only marginally improved error rates: 2.95%. Training ular test set was 3.3%. with distorted patterns improved the performance some- what: 2.50% error for the 28x28-300-100-10 network, and C.4 Radial Basis Function Network 2.45% for the 28x28-1000-150-10 network. Following 55], an RBF network was constructed. The rst layer was composed of 1,000 Gaussian RBF units with C.7 A Small Convolutional Network: LeNet-1 28x28 inputs, and the second layer was a simple 1000 inputs Convolutional Networks are an attempt to solve the / 10 outputs linear classier. The RBF units were divided dilemma between small networks that cannot learn into 10 groups of 100. Each group of units was trained the training set, and large networks that seem over- on all the training examples of one of the 10 classes using parameterized. LeNet-1 was an early embodiment of the the adaptive K-means algorithm. The second layer weights Convolutional Network architecture which is included here were computed using a regularized pseudo-inverse method. for comparison purposes. The images were down-sampled The error rate on the regular test set was 3.6% to 16x16 pixels and centered in the 28x28 input layer. Al- though about 100,000 multiply/add steps are required to C.5 One-Hidden Layer Fully Connected Multilayer Neural evaluate LeNet-1, its convolutional nature keeps the num- Network ber of free parameters to only about 2600. The LeNet- Another classier that we tested was a fully connected 1 architecture was developed using our own version of multi-layer neural network with two layers of weights (one the USPS (US Postal Service zip codes) database and its hidden layer) trained with the version of back-propagation size was tuned to match the available data 35]. LeNet-1 described in Appendix C. Error on the regular test set was achieved 1.7% test error. The fact that a network with such 4.7% for a network with 300 hidden units, and 4.5% for a a small number of parameters can attain such a good error network with 1000 hidden units. Using articial distortions rate is an indication that the architecture is appropriate to generate more training data brought only marginal im- for the task. provement: 3.6% for 300 hidden units, and 3.8% for 1000 hidden units. When deslanted images were used, the test C.8 LeNet-4 error jumped down to 1.6% for a network with 300 hidden Experiments with LeNet-1 made it clear that a larger units. convolutional network was needed to make optimal use of It remains somewhat of a mystery that networks with the large size of the training set. LeNet-4 and later LeNet- such a large number of free parameters manage to achieve 5 were designed to address this problem. LeNet-4 is very reasonably low testing errors. We conjecture that the dy- similar to LeNet-5, except for the details of the architec- namics of gradient descent learning in multilayer nets has ture. It contains 4 rst-level feature maps, followed by a \self-regularization" e ect. Because the origin of weight 8 subsampling maps connected in pairs to each rst-layer space is a saddle point that is attractive in almost every feature maps, then 16 feature maps, followed by 16 sub- direction, the weights invariably shrink during the rst sampling map, followed by a fully connected layer with few epochs (recent theoretical analysis seem to conrm 120 units, followed by the output layer (10 units). LeNet-4 this 56]). Small weights cause the sigmoids to operate contains about 260,000 connections and has about 17,000 in the quasi-linear region, making the network essentially free parameters. Test error was 1.1%. In a series of ex- equivalent to a low-capacity, single-layer network. As the periments, we replaced the last layer of LeNet-4 with a learning proceeds, the weights grow, which progressively Euclidean Nearest Neighbor classier, and with the \local increases the e ective capacity of the network. This seems learning" method of Bottou and Vapnik 58], in which a lo- to be an almost perfect, if fortuitous, implementation of cal linear classier is retrained each time a new test pattern Vapnik's \Structural Risk Minimization" principle 6]. A is shown. Neither of those methods improved the raw error better theoretical understanding of these phenomena, and rate, although they did improve the rejection performance. more empirical evidence, are denitely needed. C.9 Boosted LeNet-4 C.6 Two-Hidden Layer Fully Connected Multilayer Neural Following theoretical work by R. Schapire 59], Drucker Network et al. 60] developed the \boosting" method for combining To see the e ect of the architecture, several two-hidden multiple classiers. Three LeNet-4s are combined: the rst layer multilayer neural networks were trained. Theoreti- one is trained the usual way. the second one is trained on cal results have shown that any function can be approxi- patterns that are ltered by the rst net so that the second mated by a one-hidden layer neural network 57]. However, machine sees a mix of patterns, 50% of which the rst net several authors have observed that two-hidden layer archi- got right, and 50% of which it got wrong. Finally, the tectures sometimes yield better performance in practical third net is trained on new patterns on which the rst and situations. This phenomenon was also observed here. The the second nets disagree. During testing, the outputs of test error rate of a 28x28-300-100-10 network was 3.05%, the three nets are simply added. Because the error rate of a much better result than the one-hidden layer network, LeNet-4 is very low, it was necessary to use the articially obtained using marginally more weights and connections. distorted images (as with LeNet-5) in order to get enough Increasing the network size to 28x28-1000-150-10 yielded samples to train the second and third nets. The test error PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 14 rate was 0.7%, the best of any of our classiers. At rst [deslant] K−NN Euclidean 8.1 glance, boosting appears to be three times more expensive [16x16] Tangent Distance SVM poly 4 1.9 1.8 as a single net. In fact, when the rst net produces a high condence answer, the other nets are not called. The [deslant] 20x20−300−10 3.2 average computational cost is about 1.75 times that of a [16x16] LeNet−1 3.7 single net. LeNet−4 LeNet−4 / Local 1.4 1.8 LeNet−4 / K−NN 1.6 C.10 Tangent Distance Classier (TDC) [dist] Boosted LeNet−4 0.5 The Tangent Distance classier (TDC) is a nearest- 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 neighbor method where the distance function is made in- sensitive to small distortions and translations of the input Fig. 10. Rejection Performance: percentage of test patterns that image 61]. If we consider an image as a point in a high must be rejected to achieve 0.5% error for some of the systems. dimensional pixel space (where the dimensionality equals the number of pixels), then an evolving distortion of a char- Linear 4 36 acter traces out a curve in pixel space. Taken together, Pairwise all these distortions dene a low-dimensional manifold in [deslant] K−NN Euclidean −−−− 24,000 −−−−> pixel space. For small distortions, in the vicinity of the 40 PCA+quadratic 39 1000 RBF 794 original image, this manifold can be approximated by a [16x16] Tangent Distance −−−− 20,000 −−−−> plane, known as the tangent plane. An excellent measure SVM poly 4 −−−− 14,000 −−−−> RS−SVM poly 5 650 of "closeness" for character images is the distance between [dist] V−SVM poly 9 −−−− 28,000 −−−−> their tangent planes, where the set of distortions used to [deslant] 20x20−300−10 123 generate the planes includes translations, scaling, skewing, 28x28−1000−10 795 squeezing, rotation, and line thickness variations. A test 28x28−300−100−10 267 469 error rate of 1.1% was achieved using 16x16 pixel images. 28x28−500−150−10 Preltering techniques using simple Euclidean distance at [16x16] LeNet−1 100 multiple resolutions allowed to reduce the number of nec- LeNet−4 260 LeNet−4 / Local −−−− 20,000 −−−−> essary Tangent Distance calculations. LeNet−4 / K−NN LeNet−5 −−−− 10,000 −−−−> 401 C.11 Support Vector Machine (SVM) Boosted LeNet−4 460 0 300 600 900 Polynomial classiers are well-studied methods for gen- Fig. 11. Number of multiply-accumulate operations for the recogni- erating complex decision surfaces. Unfortunately, they tion of a single character starting with a size-normalized image. are impractical for high-dimensional problems, because the number of product terms is prohibitive. The Support Vec- tor technique is an extremely economical way of represent- has reached 0.8% using a modied version of the V-SVM. ing complex surfaces in high-dimensional spaces, including Unfortunately, V-SVM is extremely expensive: about twice polynomials and many other types of surfaces 6]. as much as regular SVM. To alleviate this problem, Burges A particularly interesting subset of decision surfaces is has proposed the Reduced Set Support Vector technique the ones that correspond to hyperplanes that are at a max- (RS-SVM), which attained 1.1% on the regular test set 63], imum distance from the convex hulls of the two classes in with a computational cost of only 650,000 multiply-adds the high-dimensional space of the product terms. Boser, per recognition, i.e. only about 60% more expensive than Guyon, and Vapnik 62] realized that any polynomial of LeNet-5. degree k in this \maximum margin" set can be computed by rst computing the dot product of the input image with D. Discussion a subset of the training samples (called the \support vec- A summary of the performance of the classiers is shown tors"), elevating the result to the k-th power, and linearly in Figures 9 to 12. Figure 9 shows the raw error rate of the combining the numbers thereby obtained. Finding the sup- classiers on the 10,000 example test set. Boosted LeNet-4 port vectors and the coecients amounts to solving a high- performed best, achieving a score of 0.7%, closely followed dimensional quadratic minimization problem with linear by LeNet-5 at 0.8%. inequality constraints. For the sake of comparison, we in- Figure 10 shows the number of patterns in the test set clude here the results obtained by Burges and Sch"olkopf that must be rejected to attain a 0.5% error for some of reported in 63]. With a regular SVM, their error rate the methods. Patterns are rejected when the value of cor- on the regular test set was 1.4%. Cortes and Vapnik had responding output is smaller than a predened threshold. reported an error rate of 1.1% with SVM on the same In many applications, rejection performance is more signif- data using a slightly di erent technique. The computa- icant than raw error rate. The score used to decide upon tional cost of this technique is very high: about 14 million the rejection of a pattern was the di erence between the multiply-adds per recognition. Using Sch"olkopf's Virtual scores of the top two classes. Again, Boosted LeNet-4 has Support Vectors technique (V-SVM), 1.0% error was at- the best performance. The enhanced versions of LeNet-4 tained. More recently, Sch"olkopf (personal communication) did better than the original LeNet-4, even though the raw PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 15 Linear 4 ing the template images. Not surprisingly, neural networks Pairwise 35 require much less memory than memory-based methods. [deslant] K−NN Euclidean −−− 24,000 −−−> The Overall performance depends on many factors in- 40 PCA+quadratic 40 794 cluding accuracy, running time, and memory requirements. As computer technology improves, larger-capacity recog- 1000 RBF [16x16] Tangent Distance −−− 25,000 −−−> SVM poly 4 −−−− 14,000 −−−−> nizers become feasible. Larger recognizers in turn require larger training sets. LeNet-1 was appropriate to the avail- RS−SVM poly 5 650 [dist] V−SVM poly 5 −−−− 28,000 −−−−> able technology in 1989, just as LeNet-5 is appropriate now. In 1989 a recognizer as complex as LeNet-5 would have re- [deslant] 20x20−300−10 123 28x28−1000−10 795 28x28−300−100−10 267 quired several weeks' training, and more data than was available, and was therefore not even considered. For quite 28x28−500−150−10 469 [16x16] LeNet 1 3 a long time, LeNet-1 was considered the state of the art. LeNet 4 17 −−− 24,000 −−−> The local learning classier, the optimal margin classier, and the tangent distance classier were developed to im- LeNet 4 / Local LeNet 4 / K−NN −−− 24,000 −−−> LeNet 5 60 prove upon LeNet-1 { and they succeeded at that. How- ever, they in turn motivated a search for improved neural Boosted LeNet 4 51 network architectures. This search was guided in part by 0 300 600 900 Fig. 12. Memory requirements, measured in number of variables, for estimates of the capacity of various learning machines, de- each of the methods. Most of the methods only require one byte rived from measurements of the training and test error as per variable for adequate performance. a function of the number of training examples. We dis- covered that more capacity was needed. Through a series accuracies were identical. of experiments in architecture, combined with an analy- Figure 11 shows the number of multiply-accumulate op- sis of the characteristics of recognition errors, LeNet-4 and erations necessary for the recognition of a single size- LeNet-5 were crafted. normalized image for each method. Expectedly, neural We nd that boosting gives a substantial improvement in networks are much less demanding than memory-based accuracy, with a relatively modest penalty in memory and methods. Convolutional Neural Networks are particu- computing expense. Also, distortion models can be used larly well suited to hardware implementations because of to increase the e ective size of a data set without actually their regular structure and their low memory requirements requiring to collect more data. for the weights. Single chip mixed analog-digital imple- The Support Vector Machine has excellent accuracy, mentations of LeNet-5's predecessors have been shown to which is most remarkable, because unlike the other high operate at speeds in excess of 1000 characters per sec- performance classiers, it does not include a priori knowl- ond 64]. However, the rapid progress of mainstream com- edge about the problem. In fact, this classier would do puter technology renders those exotic technologies quickly just as well if the image pixels were permuted with a xed obsolete. Cost-e ective implementations of memory-based mapping and lost their pictorial structure. However, reach- techniques are more elusive, due to their enormous memory ing levels of performance comparable to the Convolutional requirements, and computational requirements. Neural Networks can only be done at considerable expense Training time was also measured. K-nearest neighbors in memory and computational requirements. The reduced- and TDC have essentially zero training time. While the set SVM requirements are within a factor of two of the single-layer net, the pairwise net, and PCA+quadratic net Convolutional Networks, and the error rate is very close. could be trained in less than an hour, the multilayer net Improvements of those results are expected, as the tech- training times were expectedly much longer, but only re- nique is relatively new. quired 10 to 20 passes through the training set. This When plenty of data is available, many methods can at- amounts to 2 to 3 days of CPU to train LeNet-5 on a Sil- tain respectable accuracy. The neural-net methods run icon Graphics Origin 2000 server, using a single 200MHz much faster and require much less space than memory- R10000 processor. It is important to note that while the based techniques. The neural nets' advantage will become training time is somewhat relevant to the designer, it is of more striking as training databases continue to increase in little interest to the nal user of the system. Given the size. choice between an existing technique, and a new technique that brings marginal accuracy improvements at the price E. Invariance and Noise Resistance of considerable training time, any nal user would chose Convolutional networks are particularly well suited for the latter. recognizing or rejecting shapes with widely varying size, Figure 12 shows the memory requirements, and therefore position, and orientation, such as the ones typically pro- the number of free parameters, of the various classiers duced by heuristic segmenters in real-world string recogni- measured in terms of the number of variables that need tion systems. to be stored. Most methods require only about one byte In an experiment like the one described above, the im- per variable for adequate performance. However, Nearest- portance of noise resistance and distortion invariance is Neighbor methods may get by with 4 bits per pixel for stor- not obvious. The situation in most real applications is PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 16 quite di erent. Characters must generally be segmented W1 W2 out of their context prior to recognition. Segmentation algorithms are rarely perfect and often leave extraneous marks in character images (noise, underlines, neighboring F1(X0,X1,W1) characters), or sometimes cut characters too much and pro- t Input X3 F3(X3,X4) duce incomplete characters. Those images cannot be re- X5 Z liably size-normalized and centered. Normalizing incom- Loss X1 Function E plete characters can be very dangerous. For example, an X4 F0(X0) enlarged stray mark can look like a genuine 1. Therefore F2(X2,W2) X2 many systems have resorted to normalizing the images at D the level of elds or words. In our case, the upper and lower Desired Output proles of entire elds (amounts in a check) are detected Fig. 14. A trainable system composed of heterogeneous modules. and used to normalize the image to a xed height. While this guarantees that stray marks will not be blown up into character-looking images, this also creates wide variations words, that can be trained to simultaneously segment and of the size and vertical position of characters after segmen- recognize words, without ever being given the correct seg- tation. Therefore it is preferable to use a recognizer that is mentation. robust to such variations. Figure 13 shows several exam- Figure 14 shows an example of a trainable multi-modular ples of distorted characters that are correctly recognized by system. A multi-module system is dened by the function LeNet-5. It is estimated that accurate recognition occurs implemented by each of the modules, and by the graph of for scale variations up to about a factor of 2, vertical shift interconnection of the modules to each other. The graph variations of plus or minus about half the height of the implicitly denes a partial order according to which the character, and rotations up to plus or minus 30 degrees. modules must be updated in the forward pass. For exam- While fully invariant recognition of complex shapes is still ple in Figure 14, module 0 is rst updated, then modules 1 an elusive goal, it seems that Convolutional Networks o er and 2 are updated (possibly in parallel), and nally mod- a partial answer to the problem of invariance or robustness ule 3. Modules may or may not have trainable parameters. with respect to geometrical distortions. Loss functions, which measure the performance of the sys- Figure 13 includes examples of the robustness of LeNet- tem, are implemented as module 4. In the simplest case, 5 under extremely noisy conditions. Processing those the loss function module receives an external input that images would pose unsurmountable problems of segmen- carries the desired output. In this framework, there is no tation and feature extraction to many methods, but qualitative di erence between trainable parameters (W1,W2 LeNet-5 seems able to robustly extract salient features in the gure), external inputs and outputs (Z,D,E), and from these cluttered images. The training set used for intermediate state variables(X1,X2,X3,X4,X5). the network shown here was the MNIST training set with salt and pepper noise added. Each pixel was ran- A. An Object-Oriented Approach domly inverted with probability 0.1. More examples Object-Oriented programming o ers a particularly con- of LeNet-5 in action are available on the Internet at venient way of implementing multi-module systems. Each http://www.research.att.com/~yann/ocr. module is an instance of a class. Module classes have a \for- ward propagation" method (or member function) called IV. Multi-Module Systems and Graph fprop whose arguments are the inputs and outputs of the Transformer Networks module. For example, computing the output of module 3 The classical back-propagation algorithm, as described in Figure 14 can be done by calling the method fprop on and used in the previous sections, is a simple form of module 3 with the arguments X3,X4,X5. Complex mod- Gradient-Based Learning. However, it is clear that the ules can be constructed from simpler modules by simply gradient back-propagation algorithm given by Equation 4 dening a new class whose slots will contain the member describes a more general situation than simple multi-layer modules and the intermediate state variables between those feed-forward networks composed of alternated linear trans- modules. The fprop method for the class simply calls the formations and sigmoidal functions. In principle, deriva- fprop methods of the member modules, with the appro- tives can be back-propagated through any arrangement of priate intermediate state variables or external input and functional modules, as long as we can compute the prod- outputs as arguments. Although the algorithms are eas- uct of the Jacobians of those modules by any vector. Why ily generalizable to any network of such modules, including would we want to train systems composed of multiple het- those whose inuence graph has cycles, we will limit the dis- erogeneous modules? The answer is that large and complex cussion to the case of directed acyclic graphs (feed-forward trainable systems need to be built out of simple, specialized networks). modules. The simplest example is LeNet-5, which mixes Computing derivatives in a multi-module system is just convolutional layers, sub-sampling layers, fully-connected as simple. A \backward propagation" method, called layers, and RBF layers. Another less trivial example, de- bprop, for each module class can be dened for that pur- scribed in the next two sections, is a system for recognizing pose. The bprop method of a module takes the same ar- PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 17 C1 S2 C3 S4 C5 4 4 4 Output F6 4 3 8 4 3 3 Fig. 13. Examples of unusual, distorted, and noisy characters correctly recognized by LeNet-5. The grey-level of the output label represents the penalty (lighter for higher penalties). guments as the fprop method. All the derivatives in the used to extend the procedures to networks with recurrent system can be computed by calling the bprop method on all connections. the modules in reverse order compared to the forward prop- agation phase. The state variables are assumed to contain B. Special Modules slots for storing the gradients computed during the back- Neural networks and many other standard pattern recog- ward pass, in addition to storage for the states computed in nition techniques can be formulated in terms of multi- the forward pass. The backward pass e ectively computes modular systems trained with Gradient-Based Learning. the partial derivatives of the loss E with respect to all the Commonly used modules include matrix multiplications state variables and all the parameters in the system. There and sigmoidal modules, the combination of which can be is an interesting duality property between the forward and used to build conventional neural networks. Other mod- backward functions of certain modules. For example, a ules include convolutional layers, sub-sampling layers, RBF sum of several variables in the forward direction is trans- layers, and \softmax" layers 65]. Loss functions are also formed into a simple fan-out (replication) in the backward represented as modules whose single output produces the direction. Conversely, a fan-out in the forward direction value of the loss. Commonly used modules have simple is transformed into a sum in the backward direction. The bprop methods. In general, the bprop method of a func- software environment used to obtain the results described tion F is a multiplication by the Jacobian of F . Here are in this paper, called SN3.1, uses the above concepts. It is a few commonly used examples. The bprop method of a based on a home-grown object-oriented dialect of Lisp with fanout (a \Y" connection) is a sum, and vice versa. The a compiler to C. bprop method of a multiplication by a coecient is a mul- The fact that derivatives can be computed by propaga- tiplication by the same coecient. The bprop method of a tion in the reverse graph is easy to understand intuitively. multiplication by a matrix is a multiplication by the trans- The best way to justify it theoretically is through the use of pose of that matrix. The bprop method of an addition with Lagrange functions 21], 22]. The same formalism can be a constant is the identity. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 18 tween the modules, are all xed-size vectors. The limited exibility of xed-size vectors for data representation is a serious deciency for many applications, notably for tasks Layer Graph Transformer that deal with variable length inputs (e.g continuous speech recognition and handwritten word recognition), or for tasks that require encoding relationships between objects or fea- tures whose number and nature can vary (invariant per- ception, scene analysis, recognition of composite objects). Layer Graph Transformer An important special case is the recognition of strings of characters or words. (a) (b) More generally, xed-size vectors lack exibility for tasks in which the state must encode probability distributions over sequences of vectors or symbols as is the case in lin- Fig. 15. Traditional neural networks, and multi-module systems com- guistic processing. Such distributions over sequences are municate xed-size vectors between layer. Multi-Layer Graph Transformer Networks are composed of trainable modules that best represented by stochastic grammars, or, in the more operate on and produce graphs whose arcs carry numerical in- general case, directed graphs in which each arc contains a formation. vector (stochastic grammars are special cases in which the vector contains probabilities and symbolic information). Interestingly, certain non-di erentiable modules can be Each path in the graph represents a di erent sequence of inserted in a multi-module system without adverse e ect. vectors. Distributions over sequences can be represented An interesting example of that is the multiplexer module. by interpreting elements of the data associated with each It has two (or more) regular inputs, one switching input, arc as parameters of a probability distribution or simply and one output. The module selects one of its inputs, de- as a penalty. Distributions over sequences are particularly pending upon the (discrete) value of the switching input, handy for modeling linguistic knowledge in speech or hand- and copies it on its output. While this module is not dif- writing recognition systems: each sequence, i.e., each path ferentiable with respect to the switching input, it is di er- in the graph, represents an alternative interpretation of the entiable with respect to the regular inputs. Therefore the input. Successive processing modules progressively rene overall function of a system that includes such modules will the interpretation. For example, a speech recognition sys- be di erentiable with respect to its parameters as long as tem might start with a single sequence of acoustic vectors, the switching input does not depend upon the parameters. transform it into a lattice of phonemes (distribution over For example, the switching input can be an external input. phoneme sequences), then into a lattice of words (distribu- tion over word sequences), and then into a single sequence Another interesting case is the min module. This mod- of words representing the best interpretation. ule has two (or more) inputs and one output. The output In our work on building large-scale handwriting recog- of the module is the minimum of the inputs. The func- nition systems, we have found that these systems could tion of this module is di erentiable everywhere, except on much more easily and quickly be developed and designed the switching surface which is a set of measure zero. In- by viewing the system as a networks of modules that take terestingly, this function is continuous and reasonably reg- one or several graphs as input and produce graphs as out- ular, and that is sucient to ensure the convergence of a put. Such modules are called Graph Transformers, and the Gradient-Based Learning algorithm. complete systems are called Graph Transformer Networks, The object-oriented implementation of the multi-module or GTN. Modules in a GTN communicate their states and idea can easily be extended to include a bbprop method gradients in the form of directed graphs whose arcs carry that propagates Gauss-Newton approximations of the sec- numerical information (scalars or vectors) 66]. ond derivatives. This leads to a direct generalization for From the statistical point of view, the xed-size state modular systems of the second-derivative back-propagation vectors of conventional networks can be seen as represent- Equation 22 given in the Appendix. ing the means of distributions in state space. In variable- The multiplexer module is a special case of a much size networks such as the Space-Displacement Neural Net- more general situation, described at length in Section VIII, works described in section VII, the states are variable- where the architecture of the system changes dynamically length sequences of xed size vectors. They can be seen with the input data. Multiplexer modules can be used to as representing the mean of a probability distribution over dynamically rewire (or recongure) the architecture of the variable-length sequences of xed-size vectors. In GTNs, system for each new input pattern. the states are represented as graphs, which can be seen C. Graph Transformer Networks as representing mixtures of probability distributions over structured collections (possibly sequences) of vectors (Fig- Multi-module systems are a very exible tool for build- ure 15). ing large trainable system. However, the descriptions in One of the main points of the next several sections is the previous sections implicitly assumed that the set of to show that Gradient-Based Learning procedures are not parameters, and the state information communicated be- limited to networks of simple modules that communicate PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 19 through xed-size vectors, but can be generalized to GTNs. Gradient back-propagation through a Graph Transformer takes gradients with respect to the numerical informa- tion in the output graph, and computes gradients with re- spect to the numerical information attached to the input graphs, and with respect to the module's internal param- Fig. 16. Building a segmentation graph with Heuristic Over- eters. Gradient-Based Learning can be applied as long as Segmentation. di erentiable functions are used to produce the numerical data in the output graph from the numerical data in the input graph and the functions parameters. that it avoids making hard decisions about the segmenta- The second point of the next several sections is to show tion by taking a large number of di erent segmentations that the functions implemented by many of the modules into consideration. The idea is to use heuristic image pro- used in typical document processing systems (and other cessing techniques to nd candidate cuts of the word or image recognition systems), though commonly thought to string, and then to use the recognizer to score the alter- be combinatorial in nature, are indeed di erentiable with native segmentations thereby generated. The process is respect to their internal parameters as well as with respect depicted in Figure 16. First, a number of candidate cuts to their inputs, and are therefore usable as part of a globally are generated. Good candidate locations for cuts can be trainable system. found by locating minima in the vertical projection prole, In most of the following, we will purposely avoid making or minima of the distance between the upper and lower references to probability theory. All the quantities manip- contours of the word. Better segmentation heuristics are ulated are viewed as penalties, or costs, which if necessary described in section X. The cut generation heuristic is de- can be transformed into probabilities by taking exponen- signed so as to generate more cuts than necessary, in the tials and normalizing. hope that the \correct" set of cuts will be included. Once the cuts have been generated, alternative segmentations are V. Multiple Object Recognition: Heuristic best represented by a graph, called the segmentation graph. Over-Segmentation The segmentation graph is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) One of the most dicult problems of handwriting recog- with a start node and an end node. Each internal node is nition is to recognize not just isolated characters, but associated with a candidate cut produced by the segmen- strings of characters, such as zip codes, check amounts, tation algorithm. Each arc between a source node and a or words. Since most recognizers can only deal with one destination node is associated with an image that contains character at a time, we must rst segment the string into all the ink between the cut associated with the source node individual character images. However, it is almost impos- and the cut associated with the destination node. An arc sible to devise image analysis techniques that will infallibly is created between two nodes if the segmentor decided that segment naturally written sequences of characters into well the ink between the corresponding cuts could form a can- formed characters. didate character. Typically, each individual piece of ink The recent history of automatic speech recognition 28], would be associated with an arc. Pairs of successive pieces 67] is here to remind us that training a recognizer by opti- of ink would also be included, unless they are separated by mizing a global criterion (at the word or sentence level) is a wide gap, which is a clear indication that they belong much preferable to merely training it on hand-segmented to di erent characters. Each complete path through the phonemes or other units. Several recent works have shown graph contains each piece of ink once and only once. Each that the same is true for handwriting recognition 38]: op- path corresponds to a di erent way of associating pieces of timizing a word-level criterion is preferable to solely train- ink together so as to form characters. ing a recognizer on pre-segmented characters because the recognizer can learn not only to recognize individual char-B. Recognition Transformer and Viterbi Transformer acters, but also to reject mis-segmented characters thereby A simple GTN to recognize character strings is shown minimizing the overall word error. in Figure 17. It is composed of two graph transformers This section and the next describe in detail a simple ex- called the recognition transformer Trec , and the Viterbi ample of GTN to address the problem of reading strings of transformer Tvit . The goal of the recognition transformer characters, such as words or check amounts. The method is to generate a graph, called the interpretation graph or avoids the expensive and unreliable task of hand-truthing recognition graph Gint , that contains all the possible inter- the result of the segmentation often required in more tra- pretations for all the possible segmentations of the input. ditional systems trained on individually labeled character Each path in Gint represents one possible interpretation of images. one particular segmentation of the input. The role of the Viterbi transformer is to extract the best interpretation A. Segmentation Graph from the interpretation graph. A now classical method for word segmentation and recog- The recognition transformer Trec takes the segmentation nition is called Heuristic Over-Segmentation 68], 69]. Its graph Gseg as input, and applies the recognizer for single main advantages over other approaches to segmentation are characters to the images associated with each of the arcs PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 20 Viterbi Penalty class label character recognizer penalty for each class Σ PIECE OF THE 7.9 INTERPRETATION "0" 6.7 "0" GRAPH "1" 11.2 2 Viterbi "1" 10.3 3 "2" 6.8 Path Gvit "3" 0.2 4 "8" 0.3 "8" 13.5 "9" 12.5 "9" 8.4 T vit Viterbi Transformer Character Character W Recognizer Recognizer 3 3 1 2 2 4 4 3 Interpretation Gint 4 Graph 3 1 4 4 8 3 candidate 0.1 Recognition segment T rec NN NN NN NN NN NN Transformer PIECE OF THE SEGMENTATION 0.5 image GRAPH penalty given by the segmentor Segmentation Fig. 18. The recognition transformer renes each arc of the segmen- Gseg Graph tation arc into a set of arcs in the interpretation graph, one per character class, with attached penalties and labels. Fig. 17. Recognizing a character string with a GTN. For readability, only the arcs with low penalties are shown. famous Viterbi algorithm 70], an application of the prin- ciple of dynamic programming to nd the shortest path in a graph eciently. Let ci be the penalty associated to in the segmentation graph. The interpretation graph Gint arc i, with source node si , and destination node di (note has almost the same structure as the segmentation graph, that there can be multiple arcs between two nodes). In except that each arc is replaced by a set of arcs from and the interpretation graph, arcs also have a label li . The to the same node. In this set of arcs, there is one arc for Viterbi algorithm proceeds as follows. Each node n is as- each possible class for the image associated with the cor- sociated with a cumulated Viterbi penalty vn . Those cu- responding arc in Gseg . As shown in Figure 18, to each mulated penalties are computed in any order that satises arc is attached a class label, and the penalty that the im- the partial order dened by the interpretation graph (which age belongs to this class as produced by the recognizer. If is directed and acyclic). The start node is initialized with the segmentor has computed penalties for the candidate the cumulated penalty v = 0. The other nodes cu- segments, these penalties are combined with the penalties start mulated penalties vn are computed recursively from the v computed by the character recognizer, to obtain the penal- values of their parent nodes, through the upstream arcs ties on the arcs of the interpretation graph. Although com- Un = farc i with destination di = ng: bining penalties of di erent nature seems highly heuristic, the GTN training procedure will tune the penalties and take advantage of this combination anyway. Each path in vn = imin (ci + vsi ): (10) the interpretation graph corresponds to a possible inter- 2U n pretation of the input word. The penalty of a particular interpretation for a particular segmentation is given by the sum of the arc penalties along the corresponding path in Furthermore, the value of i for each node n which minimizes the interpretation graph. Computing the penalty of an in- the right hand side is noted mn , the minimizing entering terpretation independently of the segmentation requires to arc. When the end node is reached we obtain in v the end combine the penalties of all the paths with that interpre- total penalty of the path with the smallest total penalty. tation. An appropriate rule for combining the penalties of We call this penalty the Viterbi penalty, and this sequence parallel paths is given in section VI-C. of arcs and nodes the Viterbi path. To obtain the Viterbi The Viterbi transformer produces a graph Gvit with a path with nodes n : : : nT and arcs i : : : iT ; , we trace back 1 1 1 single path. This path is the path of least cumulated these nodes and arcs as follows, starting with nT = the end penalty in the Interpretation graph. The result of the node, and recursively using the minimizing entering arc: recognition can be produced by reading o the labels of it = mnt+1 , and nt = sit until the start node is reached. the arcs along the graph Gvit extracted by the Viterbi The label sequence can then be read o the arcs of the transformer. The Viterbi transformer owes its name to the Viterbi path. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 21 VI. Global Training for Graph Transformer Constrained Viterbi Penalty Ccvit Networks Σ The previous section describes the process of recognizing a string using Heuristic Over-Segmentation, assuming that Best Constrained Path Gcvit the recognizer is trained so as to give low penalties for the correct class label of correctly segmented characters, high Viterbi Transformer penalties for erroneous categories of correctly segmented Constrained characters, and high penalties for all categories for badly Interpretation Graph Gc formed characters. This section explains how to train the system at the string level to do the above without requiring Desired Sequence Path Selector manual labeling of character segments. This training will Interpretation Graph Gint be performed with a GTN whose architecture is slightly di erent from the recognition architecture described in the Recognition previous section. Transformer In many applications, there is enough a priori knowl- Fig. 19. Viterbi Training GTN Architecture for a character string edge about what is expected from each of the modules in recognizer based on Heuristic Over-Segmentation. order to train them separately. For example, with Heuris- tic Over-Segmentation one could individually label single- character images and train a character recognizer on them, Neural Networks (RNN). Unfortunately, despite early en- but it might be dicult to obtain an appropriate set of thusiasm, the training of RNNs with gradient-based tech- non-character images to train the model to reject wrongly niques has proved very dicult in practice 79]. segmented candidates. Although separate training is sim- The GTN techniques presented below simplify and gen- ple, it requires additional supervision information that is eralize the global training methods developed for speech often lacking or incomplete (the correct segmentation and recognition. the labels of incorrect candidate segments). Furthermore it can be shown that separate training is sub-optimal 67]. The following section describes three di erent gradient- A. Viterbi Training based methods for training GTN-based handwriting recog- nizers at the string level: Viterbi training, discriminative During recognition, we select the path in the Interpre- Viterbi training, forward training, and discriminative for- tation Graph that has the lowest penalty with the Viterbi ward training. The last one is a generalization to graph- algorithm. Ideally, we would like this path of lowest penalty based systems of the MAP criterion introduced in Sec- to be associated with the correct label sequence as often as tion II-C. Discriminative forward training is somewhat possible. An obvious loss function to minimize is therefore similar to the so-called Maximum Mutual Information cri- the average over the training set of the penalty of the path terion used to train HMM in speech recognition. However, associated with the correct label sequence that has the low- our rationale di ers from the classical one. We make no est penalty. The goal of training will be to nd the set of recourse to a probabilistic interpretation, but show that, recognizer parameters (the weights, if the recognizer is a within the Gradient-Based Learning approach, discrimina- neural network) that minimize the average penalty of this tive training is a simple instance of the pervasive principle \correct" lowest penalty path. The gradient of this loss of error correcting learning. function can be computed by back-propagation through Training methods for graph-based sequence recognition the GTN architecture shown in gure 19. This training systems such as HMMs have been extensively studied in architecture is almost identical to the recognition archi- the context of speech recognition 28]. Those methods re- tecture described in the previous section, except that an quire that the system be based on probabilistic generative extra graph transformer called a path selector is inserted models of the data, which provide normalized likelihoods between the Interpretation Graph and the Viterbi Trans- over the space of possible input sequences. Popular HMM former. This transformer takes the interpretation graph learning methods, such as the the Baum-Welsh algorithm, and the desired label sequence as input. It extracts from rely on this normalization. The normalization cannot be the interpretation graph those paths that contain the cor- preserved when non-generative models such as neural net- rect (desired) label sequence. Its output graph G is called c works are integrated into the system. Other techniques, the constrained interpretation graph (also known as forced such as discriminative training methods, must be used in alignment in the HMM literature), and contains all the this case. Several authors have proposed such methods to paths that correspond to the correct label sequence. The train neural network/HMM speech recognizers at the word constrained interpretation graph is then sent to the Viterbi or sentence level 71], 72], 73], 74], 75], 76], 77], 78], transformer which produces a graph G with a single cvit 29], 67]. path. This path is the \correct" path with the lowest Other globally trainable sequence recognition systems penalty. Finally, a path scorer transformer takes G , and cvit avoid the diculties of statistical modeling by not resorting simply computes its cumulated penalty C by adding up cvit to graph-based techniques. The best example is Recurrent the penalties along the path. The output of this GTN is PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 22 the loss function for the current pattern: that integrate neural networks with time alignment 71], 72], 76] or hybrid neural-network/HMM systems 29], 74], E =C vit cvit (11) 75]. The only label information that is required by the above While it seems simple and satisfying, this training ar- system is the sequence of desired character labels. No chitecture has a aw that can potentially be fatal. The knowledge of the correct segmentation is required on the problem was already mentioned in Section II-C. If the part of the supervisor, since it chooses among the segmen- recognizer is a simple neural network with sigmoid out- tations in the interpretation graph the one that yields the put units, the minimum of the loss function is attained, lowest penalty. not when the recognizer always gives the right answer, but The process of back-propagating gradients through the when it ignores the input, and sets its output to a constant Viterbi training GTN is now described. As explained in vector with small values for all the components. This is section IV, the gradients must be propagated backwards known as the collapse problem. The collapse only occurs if through all modules of the GTN, in order to compute gra- the recognizer outputs can simultaneously take their min- dients in preceding modules and thereafter tune their pa- imum value. If on the other hand the recognizer's out- rameters. Back-propagating gradients through the path put layer contains RBF units with xed parameters, then scorer is quite straightforward. The partial derivatives of there is no such trivial solution. This is due to the fact the loss function with respect to the individual penalties on that a set of RBF with xed distinct parameter vectors the constrained Viterbi path G are equal to 1, since the cannot simultaneously take their minimum value. In this cvit loss function is simply the sum of those penalties. Back- case, the complete collapse described above does not occur. propagating through the Viterbi Transformer is equally However, this does not totally prevent the occurrence of a simple. The partial derivatives of E with respect to the milder collapse because the loss function still has a \at vit penalties on the arcs of the constrained graph G are 1 spot" for a trivial solution with constant recognizer out- c for those arcs that appear in the constrained Viterbi path put. This at spot is a saddle point, but it is attractive in G , and 0 for those that do not. Why is it legitimate almost all directions and is very dicult to get out of using cvit to back-propagate through an essentially discrete function gradient-based minimization procedures. If the parameters such as the Viterbi Transformer? The answer is that the of the RBFs are allowed to adapt, then the collapse prob- Viterbi Transformer is nothing more than a collection of lems reappears because the RBF centers can all converge min functions and adders put together. It was shown in to a single vector, and the underlying neural network can Section IV that gradients can be back-propagated through learn to produce that vector, and ignore the input. A dif- min functions without adverse e ects. Back-propagation ferent kind of collapse occurs if the width of the RBFs are through the path selector transformer is similar to back- also allowed to adapt. The collapse only occurs if a train- propagation through the Viterbi transformer. Arcs in G able module such as a neural network feeds the RBFs. The that appear in G have the same gradient as the corre- int collapse does not occur in HMM-based speech recognition c sponding arc in G , i.e. 1 or 0, depending on whether the systems because they are generative systems that produce c arc appear in G . The other arcs, i.e. those that do normalized likelihoods for the input data (more on this cvit not have an alter ego in G because they do not contain later). Another way to avoid the collapse is to train the c the right label have a gradient of 0. During the forward whole system with respect to a discriminative training cri- propagation through the recognition transformer, one in- terion, such as maximizing the conditional probability of stance of the recognizer for single character was created the correct interpretations (correct sequence of class labels) for each arc in the segmentation graph. The state of rec- given the input image. ognizer instances was stored. Since each arc penalty in Another problem with Viterbi training is that the G is produced by an individual output of a recognizer penalty of the answer cannot be used reliably as a mea- int instance, we now have a gradient (1 or 0) for each out- sure of condence because it does not take low-penalty (or put of each instance of the recognizer. Recognizer outputs high-scoring) competing answers into account. that have a non zero gradient are part of the correct an- B. Discriminative Viterbi Training swer, and will therefore have their value pushed down. The gradients present on the recognizer outputs can be back- A modication of the training criterion can circumvent propagated through each recognizer instance. For each rec- the collapse problem described above and at the same time ognizer instance, we obtain a vector of partial derivatives produce more reliable condence values. The idea is to not of the loss function with respect to the recognizer instance only minimize the cumulated penalty of the lowest penalty parameters. All the recognizer instances share the same pa- path with the correct interpretation, but also to somehow rameter vector, since they are merely clones of each other, increase the penalty of competing and possibly incorrect therefore the full gradient of the loss function with respect paths that have a dangerously low penalty. This type of to the recognizer's parameter vector is simply the sum of criterion is called discriminative, because it plays the good the gradient vectors produced by each recognizer instance. answers against the bad ones. Discriminative training pro- Viterbi training, though formulated di erently, is often use cedures can be seen as attempting to build appropriate in HMM-based speech recognition systems 28]. Similar al- separating surfaces between classes rather than to model gorithms have been applied to speech recognition systems individual classes independently of each other. For exam- PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 23 Loss Function [0.1](+1) [0.7](+1) + Σ − [0.6](−1) + + 3 [0.1](+1) Gvit Gcvit 4 [0.6](+1) 3 [0.1](−1) 4 [0.4](−1) 1 [0.1](−1) Viterbi Tansformer 3 [0.1](+1) 4 [2.4](0) Gc Viterbi Transformer 3 [3.4](0) 4 [0.6](+1) "34" Path Selector Desired Answer 3 [0.1](0) 4 [0.4](−1) 1 [0.1](−1) Interpretation 5 [2.3](0) 2 [1.3](0) 4 [2.4](0) Graph G int 3 [3.4](0) 4 [0.6](+1) 4 [4.4](0) 9 [1.2](0) (−1) (+1) (−1) Recognition 4 4 1 Transfomer W NN NN NN NN NN Neural Net T rec Weights Segmentation Graph Gseg Segmenter Fig. 20. Discriminative Viterbi Training GTN Architecture for a character string recognizer based on Heuristic Over-Segmentation. Quantities in square brackets are penalties computed during the forward propagation. Quantities in parentheses are partial derivatives computed during the backward propagation. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 24 ple, modeling the conditional distribution of the classes low penalty, but should have had a higher penalty since it given the input image is more discriminative (focus-sing is not part of the desired answer. more on the classication surface) than having a separate Variations of this technique have been used for the speech generative model of the input data associated to each class recognition. Driancourt and Bottou 76] used a version of (which, with class priors, yields the whole joint distribu- it where the loss function is saturated to a xed value. tion of classes and inputs). This is because the conditional This can be seen as a generalization of the Learning Vector approach does not need to assume a particular form for the Quantization 2 (LVQ-2) loss function 80]. Other variations distribution of the input data. of this method use not only the Viterbi path, but the K- One example of discriminative criterion is the di erence best paths. The Discriminative Viterbi algorithm does not between the penalty of the Viterbi path in the constrained have the aws of the non-discriminative version, but there graph, and the penalty of the Viterbi path in the (uncon- are problems nonetheless. The main problem is that the strained) interpretation graph, i.e. the di erence between criterion does not build a margin between the classes. The the penalty of the best correct path, and the penalty of gradient is zero as soon as the penalty of the constrained the best path (correct or incorrect). The corresponding Viterbi path is equal to that of the Viterbi path. It would GTN training architecture is shown in gure 20. The left be desirable to push up the penalties of the wrong paths side of the diagram is identical to the GTN used for non- when they are dangerously close to the good one. The discriminative Viterbi training. This loss function reduces following section presents a solution to this problem. the risk of collapse because it forces the recognizer to in- creases the penalty of wrongly recognized objects. Dis- C. Forward Scoring, and Forward Training criminative training can also be seen as another example of error correction procedure, which tends to minimize the While the penalty of the Viterbi path is perfectly appro- di erence between the desired output computed in the left priate for the purpose of recognition, it gives only a partial half of the GTN in gure 20 and the actual output com- picture of the situation. Imagine the lowest penalty paths puted in the right half of gure 20. corresponding to several dierent segmentations produced Let the discriminative Viterbi loss function be denoted the same answer (the same label sequence). Then it could E , and let us call C the penalty of the Viterbi path in dvit cvit be argued that the overall penalty for the interpretation the constrained graph, and C the penalty of the Viterbi vit should be smaller than the penalty obtained when only one path in the unconstrained interpretation graph: path produced that interpretation, because multiple paths E =C ;C (12) with identical label sequences are more evidence that the dvit cvit vit label sequence is correct. Several rules can be used com- E is always positive since the constrained graph is a pute the penalty associated to a graph that contains several parallel paths. We use a combination rule borrowed from dvit subset of the paths in the interpretation graph, and the Viterbi algorithm selects the path with the lowest total a probabilistic interpretation of the penalties as negative penalty. In the ideal case, the two paths C and C log posteriors. In a probabilistic framework, the posterior probability for the interpretation should be the sum of the cvit vit coincide, and E is zero. posteriors for all the paths that produce that interpreta- dvit Back-propagating gradients through the discriminative Viterbi GTN adds some \negative" training to the pre- tion. Translated in terms of penalties, the penalty of an viously described non-discriminative training. Figure 20 interpretation should be the negative logarithm of the sum shows how the gradients are back-propagated. The left of the negative exponentials of the penalties of the individ- half is identical to the non-discriminative Viterbi training ual paths. The overall penalty will be smaller than all the GTN, therefore the back-propagation is identical. The gra- penalties of the individual paths. dients back-propagated through the right half of the GTN Given an interpretation, there is a well known method, are multiplied by -1, since C contributes to the loss with vit called the forward algorithm for computing the above quan- a negative sign. Otherwise the process is similar to the left tity eciently 28]. The penalty computed with this pro- half. The gradients on arcs of G get positive contribu- int cedure for a particular interpretation is called the forward tions from the left half and negative contributions from the penalty. Consider again the concept of constrained graph, right half. The two contributions must be added, since the the subgraph of the interpretation graph which contains penalties on G arcs are sent to the two halves through int only the paths that are consistent with a particular label a \Y" connection in the forward pass. Arcs in G that int sequence. There is one constrained graph for each pos- appear neither in G nor in G have a gradient of zero. vit cvit sible label sequence (some may be empty graphs, which They do not contribute to the cost. Arcs that appear in have innite penalties). Given an interpretation, running both G and G also have zero gradient. The -1 contri- vit cvit the forward algorithm on the corresponding constrained bution from the right half cancels the the +1 contribution graph gives the forward penalty for that interpretation. from the left half. In other words, when an arc is rightfully The forward algorithm proceeds in a way very similar to part of the answer, there is no gradient. If an arc appears the Viterbi algorithm, except that the operation used at in G but not in G , the gradient is +1. The arc should cvit vit each node to combine the incoming cumulated penalties, have had a lower penalty to make it to G . If an arc is vit instead of being the min function is the so-called logadd in G but not in G , the gradient is -1. The arc had a vit cvit operation, which can be seen as a \soft" version of the min PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 25 function: Edforw fn = logaddi2Un (ci + fsi ): (13) where f = 0, Un is the set of upstream arcs of node n, start Cdforw + − ci is the penalty on arc i, and Cforw Xn e x ) logadd(x  x  : : :  xn ) = ; log( ; i (14) Constrained Forward Scorer 1 2 Gc Forward Scorer i=1 Interpretation Graph Desired Note that because of numerical inaccuracies, it is better Sequence Path Selector to factorize the largest e;xi (corresponding to the smallest Gint penalty) out of the logarithm. Interpretation Graph An interesting analogy can be drawn if we consider that a graph on which we apply the forward algorithm is equiv- Recognition Transformer alent to a neural network on which we run a forward prop- agation, except that multiplications are replaced by addi- Fig. 21. Discriminative Forward Training GTN Architecture tions, the additions are replaced by logadds, and there are for a character string recognizer based on Heuristic Over- no sigmoids. Segmentation. One way to understand the forward algorithm is to think about multiplicative scores (e.g., probabilities) instead of G additive penalties on the arcs: score = exp(; penalty ). In @E = e;fn X @E efdi ;ci c that case the Viterbi algorithm selects the path with the @fn (15) largest cumulative score (with scores multiplied along the i2Dn @fdi path), whereas the forward score is the sum of the cumula- where Dn = farc i with source si = ng is the set of down- tive scores associated to each of the possible paths from the stream arcs from node n. From the above derivatives, the start to the end node. The forward penalty is always lower derivatives with respect to the arc penalties are obtained: than the cumulated penalty on any of the paths, but if one @E = @E e;ci ;fsi fdi path \dominates" (with a much lower penalty), its penalty + (16) is almost equal to the forward penalty. The forward algo- @ci @fdi rithm gets its name from the forward pass of the well-known This can be seen as a \soft" version of the back-propagation Baum-Welsh algorithm for training Hidden Markov Mod- through a Viterbi scorer and transformer. All the arcs in els 28]. Section VIII-E gives more details on the relation G have an inuence on the loss function. The arcs that between this work and HMMs. c belong to low penalty paths have a larger inuence. Back- The advantage of the forward penalty with respect to propagation through the path selector is the same as before. the Viterbi penalty is that it takes into account all the The derivative with respect to G arcs that have an alter di erent ways to produce an answer, and not just the one int ego in G are simply copied from the corresponding arc in with the lowest penalty. This is important if there is some c G . The derivatives with respect to the other arcs are 0. ambiguity in the segmentation, since the combined forward c Several authors have applied the idea of back- penalty of two paths C and C associated with the same 1 2 propagating gradients through a forward scorer to train label sequence may be less than the penalty of a path C 3 speech recognition systems, including Bridle and his -net associated with another label sequence, even though the model 73] and Ha ner and his  -TDNN model 81], but penalty of C might be less than any one of C or C . 3 1 2 these authors recommended discriminative training as de- The Forward training GTN is only a slight modica- scribed in the next section. tion of the previously introduced Viterbi training GTN. It suces to turn the Viterbi transformers in Figure 19 into D. Discriminative Forward Training Forward Scorers that take an interpretation graph as input The information contained in the forward penalty can be an produce the forward penalty of that graph on output. used in another discriminative training criterion which we Then the penalties of all the paths that contain the correct will call the discriminative forward criterion. This criterion answer are lowered, instead of just that of the best one. corresponds to maximization of the posterior probability of Back-propagating through the forward penalty computa- choosing the paths associated with the correct interpreta- tion (the forward transformer) is quite di erent from back- tion. This posterior probability is dened as the exponen- propagating through a Viterbi transformer. All the penal- tial of the minus the constrained forward penalty, normal- ties of the input graph have an inuence on the forward ized by the exponential of minus the unconstrained forward penalty, but penalties that belong to low-penalty paths penalty. Note that the forward penalty of the constrained have a stronger inuence. Computing derivatives with re- graph is always larger or equal to the forward penalty of the spect to the forward penalties fn computed at each n node unconstrained interpretation graph. Ideally, we would like of a graph is done by back-propagation through the graph the forward penalty of the constrained graph to be equal to PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 26 the forward penalty of the complete interpretation graph. E. Remarks on Discriminative Training Equality between those two quantities is achieved when the In the above discussion, the global training criterion combined penalties of the paths with the correct label se- was given a probabilistic interpretation, but the individ- quence is negligibly small compared to the penalties of all ual penalties on the arcs of the graphs were not. There are the other paths, or that the posterior probability associ- good reasons for that. For example, if some penalties are ated to the paths with the correct interpretation is almost associated to the di erent class labels, they would (1) have 1, which is precisely what we want. The corresponding to sum to 1 (class posteriors), or (2) integrate to 1 over the GTN training architecture is shown in gure 21. input domain (likelihoods). Let the di erence be denoted E , and let us call dforw Let us rst discuss the rst case (class posteriors normal- Ccforw the forward penalty of the constrained graph, and ization). This local normalization of penalties may elimi- C the forward penalty of the complete interpretation forw nate information that is important for locally rejecting all graph: the classes 82], e.g., when a piece of image does not cor- Edforw =C cforw ;C forw (17) respond to a valid character class, because some of the Edforw is always positive since the constrained graph is a segmentation candidates may be wrong. Although an ex- subset of the paths in the interpretation graph, and the plicit \garbage class" can be introduced in a probabilistic forward penalty of a graph is always larger than the for- framework to address that question, some problems remain ward penalty of a subgraph of this graph. In the ideal case, because it is dicult to characterize such a class probabilis- the penalties of incorrect paths are innitely large, there- tically and to train a system in this way (it would require fore the two penalties coincide and E dforw is zero. Readers a density model of unseen or unlabeled samples). familiar with the Boltzmann machine connectionist model The probabilistic interpretation of individual variables might recognize the constrained and unconstrained graphs plays an important role in the Baum-Welsh algorithm as analogous to the \clamped" (constrained by the ob- in combination with the Expectation-Maximization proce- served values of the output variable) and \free" (uncon- dure. Unfortunately, those methods cannot be applied to strained) phases of the Boltzmann machine algorithm 13]. discriminative training criteria, and one is reduced to us- Back-propagating derivatives through the discriminative ing gradient-based methods. Enforcing the normalization Forward GTN distributes gradients more evenly than in the of the probabilistic quantities while performing gradient- Viterbi case. Derivatives are back-propagated through the based learning is complex, inecient, time consuming, and left half of the the GTN in Figure 21 down to the interpre- creates ill-conditioning of the loss-function. tation graph. Derivatives are negated and back-propagated Following 82], we therefore prefer to postpone normal- through the right-half, and the result for each arc is added ization as far as possible (in fact, until the nal decision to the contribution from the left half. Each arc in G int stage of the system). Without normalization, the quanti- now has a derivative. Arcs that are part of a correct path ties manipulated in the system do not have a direct prob- have a positive derivative. This derivative is very large if abilistic interpretation. an incorrect path has a lower penalty than all the correct Let us now discuss the second case (using a generative paths. Similarly, the derivatives with respect to arcs that model of the input). Generative models build the boundary are part of a low-penalty incorrect path have a large nega- indirectly, by rst building an independent density model tive derivative. On the other hand, if the penalty of a path for each class, and then performing classication decisions associated with the correct interpretation is much smaller on the basis of these models. This is not a discriminative than all other paths, the loss function is very close to 0 approach in that it does not focus on the ultimate goal of and almost no gradient is back-propagated. The training learning, which in this case is to learn the classication de- therefore concentrates on examples of images which yield a cision surface. Theoretical arguments 6], 7] suggest that classication error, and furthermore, it concentrates on the estimating input densities when the real goal is to obtain pieces of the image which cause that error. Discriminative a discriminant function for classication is a suboptimal forward training is an elegant and ecient way of solving strategy. In theory, the problem of estimating densities in the infamous credit assignment problem for learning ma- high-dimensional spaces is much more ill-posed than nd- chines that manipulate \dynamic" data structures such as ing decision boundaries. graphs. More generally, the same idea can be used in all Even though the internal variables of the system do not situations where a learning machine must choose between have a direct probabilistic interpretation, the overall sys- discrete alternative interpretations. tem can still be viewed as producing posterior probabilities As previously, the derivatives on the interpretation graph for the classes. In fact, assuming that a particular label se- penalties can then be back-propagated into the character quence is given as the \desired sequence" to the GTN in recognizer instances. Back-propagation through the char- gure 21, the exponential of minus E dforw can be inter- acter recognizer gives derivatives on its parameters. All the preted as an estimate of the posterior probability of that gradient contributions for the di erent candidate segments label sequence given the input. The sum of those posteriors are added up to obtain the total gradient associated to one for all the possible label sequences is 1. Another approach pair (input image, correct label sequence), that is, one ex- would consists of directly minimizing an approximation of ample in the training set. A step of stochastic gradient the number of misclassications 83] 76]. We prefer to use descent can then be applied to update the parameters. the discriminative forward loss function because it causes PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 27 "U" Recognizer Fig. 22. Explicit segmentation can be avoided by sweeping a recog- nizer at every possible location in the input eld. less numerical problems during the optimization. We will $ see in Section X-C that this is a good way to obtain scores on which to base a rejection strategy. The important point Fig. 23. A Space Displacement Neural Network is a convolutional being made here is that one is free to choose any param- network that has been replicated over a wide input eld. eterization deemed appropriate for a classication model. The fact that a particular parameterization uses internal variables with no clear probabilistic interpretation does not characters within a string may have widely varying sizes make the model any less legitimate than models that ma- and baseline positions. Therefore the recognizer must be nipulate normalized quantities. very robust to shifts and size variations. An important advantage of global and discriminative These three problems are elegantly circumvented if a training is that learning focuses on the most important convolutional network is replicated over the input eld. errors, and the system learns to integrate the ambigui- First of all, as shown in section III, convolutional neu- ties from the segmentation algorithm with the ambigui- ral networks are very robust to shifts and scale varia- ties of the character recognizer. In Section IX we present tions of the input image, as well as to noise and extra- experimental results with an on-line handwriting recogni- neous marks in the input. These properties take care of tion system that conrm the advantages of using global the latter two problems mentioned in the previous para- training versus separate training. Experiments in speech graph. Second, convolutional networks provide a drastic recognition with hybrids of neural networks and HMMs saving in computational requirement when replicated over also showed marked improvements brought by global train- large input elds. A replicated convolutional network, also ing 77], 29], 67], 84]. called a Space Displacement Neural Network or SDNN 27], is shown in Figure 23. While scanning a recognizer can VII. Multiple Object Recognition: Space be prohibitively expensive in general, convolutional net- Displacement Neural Network works can be scanned or replicated very eciently over . large, variable-size input elds. Consider one instance of There is a simple alternative to explicitly segmenting im- a convolutional net and its alter ego at a nearby location. ages of character strings using heuristics. The idea is to Because of the convolutional nature of the network, units sweep a recognizer at all possible locations across a nor- in the two instances that look at identical locations on the malized image of the entire word or string as shown in input have identical outputs, therefore their states do not Figure 22. With this technique, no segmentation heuris- need to be computed twice. Only a thin \slice" of new tics are required since the system essentially examines all states that are not shared by the two network instances the possible segmentations of the input. However, there needs to be recomputed. When all the slices are put to- are problems with this approach. First, the method is in gether, the result is simply a larger convolutional network general quite expensive. The recognizer must be applied whose structure is identical to the original network, except at every possible location on the input, or at least at a that the feature maps are larger in the horizontal dimen- large enough subset of locations so that misalignments of sion. In other words, replicating a convolutional network characters in the eld of view of the recognizers are small can be done simply by increasing the size of the elds over enough to have no e ect on the error rate. Second, when which the convolutions are performed, and by replicating the recognizer is centered on a character to be recognized, the output layer accordingly. The output layer e ectively the neighbors of the center character will be present in the becomes a convolutional layer. An output whose receptive eld of view of the recognizer, possibly touching the cen- eld is centered on an elementary object will produce the ter character. Therefore the recognizer must be able to class of this object, while an in-between output may indi- correctly recognize the character in the center of its input cate no character or contain rubbish. The outputs can be eld, even if neighboring characters are very close to, or interpreted as evidences for the presence of objects at all touching the central character. Third, a word or charac- possible positions in the input eld. ter string cannot be perfectly size normalized. Individual The SDNN architecture seems particularly attractive for PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 28 recognizing cursive handwriting where no reliable segmen- Viterbi Answer tation heuristic exists. Although the idea of SDNN is quite old, and very attractive by its simplicity, it has not gener- Viterbi Graph ated wide interest until recently because, as stated above, it puts enormous demands on the recognizer 26], 27]. In Viterbi Transformer speech recognition, where the recognizer is at least one order of magnitude smaller, replicated convolutional net- Interpretation Graph works are easier to implement, for instance in Ha ner's Character Multi-State TDNN model 78], 85]. Model Compose Transducer A. Interpreting the Output of an SDNN with a GTN S....c.....r......i....p....t The output of an SDNN is a sequence of vectors which SDNN Output s....e.....n.....e.j...o.T 5......a...i...u......p.....f encode the likelihoods, penalties, or scores of nding char- acter of a particular class label at the corresponding lo- SDNN cation in the input. A post-processor is required to pull Transformer out the best possible label sequence from this vector se- quence. An example of SDNN output is shown in Fig- Fig. 24. A Graph Transformer pulls out the best interpretation from ure 25. Very often, individual characters are spotted by the output of the SDNN. several neighboring instances of the recognizer, a conse- quence of the robustness of the recognizer to horizontal C1 C3 C5 translations. Also quite often, characters are erroneously 2345 Answer detected by recognizer instances that see only a piece of Compose + Viterbi a character. For example a recognizer instance that only 2 33 4 5 SDNN Output sees the right third of a \4" might output the label 1. How F6 can we eliminate those extraneous characters from the out- put sequence and pull-out the best interpretation? This Input can be done using a new type of Graph Transformer with two input graphs as shown in Figure 24. The sequence of vectors produced by the SDNN is rst coded into a linear graph with multiple arcs between pairs of successive nodes. Each arc between a particular pair of nodes contains the Fig. 25. An example of multiple character recognition with SDNN. With SDNN, no explicit segmentation is performed. label of one of the possible categories, together with the penalty produced by the SDNN for that class label at that location. This graph is called the SDNN Output Graph. B. Experiments with SDNN The second input graph to the transformer is a grammar transducer, more specically a nite-state transducer 86], In a series of experiments, LeNet-5 was trained with the that encodes the relationship between input strings of class goal of being replicated so as to recognize multiple char- labels and corresponding output strings of recognized char- acters without segmentations. The data was generated acters.The transducer is a weighted nite state machine (a from the previously described Modied NIST set as fol- graph) where each arc contains a pair of labels and possibly lows. Training images were composed of a central char- a penalty. Like a nite-state machine, a transducer is in a acter, anked by two side characters picked at random in state and follows an arc to a new state when an observed the training set. The separation between the bounding input symbol matches the rst symbol in the symbol pair boxes of the characters were chosen at random between -1 attached to the arc. At this point the transducer emits the and 4 pixels. In other instances, no central character was second symbol in the pair together with a penalty that com- present, in which case the desired output of the network bines the penalty of the input symbol and the penalty of was the blank space class. In addition, training images the arc. A transducer therefore transforms a weighted sym- were degraded with 10% salt and pepper noise (random bol sequence into another weighted symbol sequence. The pixel inversions). graph transformer shown in gure 24 performs a composi- Figures 25 and 26 show a few examples of success- tion between the recognition graph and the grammar trans- ful recognitions of multiple characters by the LeNet-5 ducer. This operation takes every possible sequence corre- SDNN. Standard techniques based on Heuristic Over- sponding to every possible path in the recognition graph Segmentation would fail miserably on many of those ex- and matches them with the paths in the grammar trans- amples. As can be seen on these examples, the network ducer. The composition produces the interpretation graph, exhibits striking invariance and noise resistance properties. which contains a path for each corresponding output label While some authors have argued that invariance requires sequence. This composition operation may seem combina- more sophisticated models than feed-forward neural net- torially intractable, but it turns out there exists an ecient works 87], LeNet-5 exhibits these properties to a large ex- algorithm for it described in more details in Section VIII. tent. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 29 540 1114 55 4 0 1 1 1 441 Answer 678 3514 SDNN output 6 777 88 3 55 114 F6 Input Fig. 26. An SDNN applied to a noisy image of digit string. The digits shown in the SDNN output represent the winning class labels, with a lighter grey level for high-penalty answers. Similarly, it has been suggested that accurate recognition which they can be implemented on parallel hardware. Spe- of multiple overlapping objects require explicit mechanisms cialized analog/digital chips have been designed and used that would solve the so-called feature binding problem 87]. in character recognition, and in image preprocessing appli- As can be seen on Figures 25 and 26, the network is able to cations 88]. However the rapid progress of conventional tell the characters apart, even when they are closely inter- processor technology with reduced-precision vector arith- twined, a task that would be impossible to achieve with the metic instructions (such as Intel's MMX) make the success more classical Heuristic Over-Segmentation technique. The of specialized hardware hypothetical at best. SDNN is also able to correctly group disconnected pieces Short video clips of the LeNet-5 SDNN can be viewed at of ink that form characters. Good examples of that are http://www.research.att.com/~yann/ocr. shown in the upper half of gure 26. In the top left ex- ample, the 4 and the 0 are more connected to each other C. Global Training of SDNN than they are connected with themselves, yet the system In the above experiments, the string image were arti- correctly identies the 4 and the 0 as separate objects. The cially generated from individual character. The advantage top right example is interesting for several reasons. First is that we know in advance the location and the label of the system correctly identies the three individual ones. the important character. With real training data, the cor- Second, the left half and right half of disconnected 4 are rect sequence of labels for a string is generally available, correctly grouped, even though no geometrical information but the precise locations of each corresponding character could decide to associate the left half to the vertical bar on in the input image are unknown. its left or on its right. The right half of the 4 does cause In the experiments described in the previous section, the the appearance of an erroneous 1 on the SDNN output, best interpretation was extracted from the SDNN output but this one is removed by the character model transducer using a very simple graph transformer. Global training of which prevents characters from appearing on contiguous an SDNN can be performed by back-propagating gradients outputs. through such graph transformers arranged in architectures Another important advantage of SDNN is the ease with similar to the ones described in section VI. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 30 Edforw zip code recognition 91], and more recent experiments in on-line handwriting recognition 38] have demonstrated the idea of globally-trained SDNN/HMM hybrids. SDNN is an Cdforw + − extremely promising and attractive technique for OCR, but Cforw so far it has not yielded better results than Heuristic Over- Segmentation. We hope that these results will improve as Forward Scorer more experience is gained with these models. Constrained Interpretation Graph Gc Forward Scorer D. Object Detection and Spotting with SDNN Desired Path Selector An interesting application of SDNNs is object detection Sequence and spotting. The invariance properties of Convolutional Gint Networks, combined with the eciency with which they Interpretation Graph can be replicated over large elds suggest that they can Character be used for \brute force" object spotting and detection in Model Transducer Compose large images. The main idea is to train a single Convolu- tional Network to distinguish images of the object of inter- SDNN Output S....c.....r......i....p....t s....e.....n.....e.j...o.T est from images present in the background. In utilization mode, the network is replicated so as to cover the entire 5......a...i...u......p.....f SDNN image to be analyzed, thereby forming a two-dimensional Transformer Space Displacement Neural Network. The output of the SDNN is a two-dimensional plane in which activated units Fig. 27. A globally trainable SDNN/HMM hybrid system expressed indicate the presence of the object of interest in the corre- as a GTN. sponding receptive eld. Since the sizes of the objects to be detected within the image are unknown, the image can be presented to the network at multiple resolutions, and This is somewhat equivalent to modeling the output the results at multiple resolutions combined. The idea has of an SDNN with a Hidden Markov Model. Globally been applied to face location, 93], address block location trained, variable-size TDNN/HMM hybrids have been used on envelopes 94], and hand tracking in video 95]. for speech recognition and on-line handwriting recogni- To illustrate the method, we will consider the case of tion 77], 89], 90], 67]. Space Displacement Neural Net- face detection in images as described in 93]. First, images works have been used in combination with HMMs or other containing faces at various scales are collected. Those im- elastic matching methods for handwritten word recogni- ages are ltered through a zero-mean Laplacian lter so as tion 91], 92]. to remove variations in global illumination and low spatial Figure 27 shows the graph transformer architecture for frequency illumination gradients. Then, training samples training an SDNN/HMM hybrid with the Discriminative of faces and non-faces are manually extracted from those Forward Criterion. The top part is comparable to the top images. The face sub-images are then size normalized so part of gure 21. On the right side the composition of the that the height of the entire face is approximately 20 pixels recognition graph with the grammar gives the interpreta- while keeping fairly large variations (within a factor of two). tion graph with all the possible legal interpretations. On The scale of background sub-images are picked at random. the left side the composition is performed with a grammar A single convolutional network is trained on those samples that only contains paths with the desired sequence of la- to classify face sub-images from non-face sub-images. bels. This has a somewhat similar function to the path When a scene image is to be analyzed, it is rst ltered selector used in the previous section. Like in Section VI-D through the Laplacian lter, and sub-sampled at powers- the loss function is the di erence between the forward score of-two resolutions. The network is replicated over each of obtained from the left half and the forward score obtained multiple resolution images. A simple voting technique is from the right half. To back-propagate through the com- used to combine the results from multiple resolutions. position transformer, we need to keep a record of which arc A two-dimensional version of the global training method in the recognition graph originated which arcs in the inter- described in the previous section can be used to allevi- pretation graph. The derivative with respect to an arc in ate the need to manually locate faces when building the the recognition graph is equal to the sum of the derivatives training sample 93]. Each possible location is seen as an with respect to all the arcs in the interpretation graph that alternative interpretation, i.e. one of several parallel arcs originated from it. Derivative can also be computed for the in a simple graph that only contains a start node and an penalties on the grammar graph, allowing to learn them as end node. well. As in the previous example, a discriminative criterion Other authors have used Neural Networks, or other clas- must be used, because using a non-discriminative criterion siers such as Support Vector Machines for face detection could result in a collapse e ect if the network's output RBF with great success 96], 97]. Their systems are very similar are adaptive. The above training procedure can be equiv- to the one described above, including the idea of presenting alently formulated in term of HMM. Early experiments in the image to the network at multiple scales. But since those PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 31 systems do not use Convolutional Networks, they cannot path and a corresponding pair of input/output sequences take advantage of the speedup described here, and have to (S ,S ) in the transducer graph. The weights on the arcs out in rely on other techniques, such as pre-ltering and real-time of the output graph are obtained by adding the weights tracking, to keep the computational requirement within from the matching arcs in the input acceptor and trans- reasonable limits. In addition, because those classiers are ducer graphs. In the rest of the paper, we will call this much less invariant to scale variations than Convolutional graph composition operation using transducers the (stan- Networks, it is necessary to multiply the number of scales dard) transduction operation. at which the images are presented to the classier. A simple example of transduction is shown in Figure 28. In this simple example, the input and output symbols on VIII. Graph Transformer Networks and the transducer arcs are always identical. This type of trans- Transducers ducer graph is called a grammar graph. To better under- In Section IV, Graph Transformer Networks (GTN) stand the transduction operation, imagine two tokens sit- were introduced as a generalization of multi-layer, multi- ting each on the start nodes of the input acceptor graph module networks where the state information is repre- and the transducer graph. The tokens can freely follow sented as graphs instead of xed-size vectors. This section any arc labeled with a null input symbol. A token can re-interprets the GTNs in the framework of Generalized follow an arc labeled with a non-null input symbol if the Transduction, and proposes a powerful Graph Composition other token also follows an arc labeled with the same in- algorithm. put symbol. We have an acceptable trajectory when both tokens reach the end nodes of their graphs (i.e. the tokens A. Previous Work have reached the terminal conguration). This trajectory Numerous authors in speech recognition have used represents a sequence of input symbols that complies with Gradient-Based Learning methods that integrate graph- both the acceptor and the transducer. We can then collect based statistical models (notably HMM) with acoustic the corresponding sequence of output symbols along the recognition modules, mainly Gaussian mixture models, but trajectory of the transducer token. The above procedure also neural networks 98], 78], 99], 67]. Similar ideas have produces a tree, but a simple technique described in Sec- been applied to handwriting recognition (see 38] for a re- tion VIII-C can be used to avoid generating multiple copies view). However, there has been no proposal for a system- of certain subgraphs by detecting when a particular output atic approach to multi-layer graph-based trainable systems. state has already been seen. The idea of transforming graphs into other graphs has re- The transduction operation can be performed very e- ceived considerable interest in computer science, through ciently 106], but presents complex book-keeping problems the concept of weighted nite-state transducers 86]. Trans- concerning the handling of all combinations of null and non ducers have been applied to speech recognition 100] and null symbols. If the weights are interpreted as probabilities language translation 101], and proposals have been made (normalized appropriately) then an acceptor graph repre- for handwriting recognition 102]. This line of work has sents a probability distribution over the language dened been mainly focused on ecient search algorithms 103] by the set of label sequences associated to all possible paths and on the algebraic aspects of combining transducers and (from the start to the end node) in the graph. graphs (called acceptors in this context), but very little An example of application of the transduction opera- e ort has been devoted to building globally trainable sys- tion is the incorporation of linguistic constraints (a lexicon tems out of transducers. What is proposed in the follow- or a grammar) when recognizing words or other character ing sections is a systematic approach to automatic training strings. The recognition transformer produces the recog- in graph-manipulating systems. A di erent approach to nition graph (an acceptor graph) by applying the neural graph-based trainable systems, called Input-Output HMM, network recognizer to each candidate segment. This ac- was proposed in 104], 105]. ceptor graph is composed with a transducer graph for the grammar. The grammar transducer contains a path for B. Standard Transduction each legal sequence of symbol, possibly augmented with In the established framework of nite-state transduc- penalties to indicate the relative likelihoods of the possi- ers 86], discrete symbols are attached to arcs in the graphs. ble sequences. The arcs contain identical input and output Acceptor graphs have a single symbol attached to each symbols. Another example of transduction was mentioned arc whereas transducer graphs have two symbols (an input in Section V: the path selector used in the heuristic over- symbol and an output symbol). A special null symbol is segmentation training GTN is implementable by a compo- absorbed by any other symbol (when concatenating sym- sition. The transducer graph is linear graph which con- bols to build a symbol sequence). Weighted transducers tains the correct label sequence. The composition of the and acceptors also have a scalar quantity attached to each interpretation graph with this linear graph yields the con- arc. In this framework, the composition operation takes as strained graph. input an acceptor graph and a transducer graph and builds C. Generalized Transduction an output acceptor graph. Each path in this output graph (with symbol sequence S ) corresponds to one path (with out If the data structures associated to each arc took only symbol sequence S ) in the input acceptor graph and one a nite number of values, composing the input graph and in PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 32 an appropriate transducer would be a sound solution. For interpretation graph interpretations: cut (2.0) our applications however, the data structures attached to "t" 0.8 cap (0.8) cat (1.4) the arcs of the graphs may be vectors, images or other 0.8 high-dimensional objects that are not readily enumerated. "u" "p" 0.2 We present a new composition operation that solves this "c" 0.4 "a" 0.2 grammar graph problem. "t" 0.8 "r" "n" Instead of only handling graphs with discrete symbols "a" and penalties on the arcs, we are interested in considering Graph Composition "t" graphs whose arcs may carry complex data structures, in- match match match "b" "u" cluding continuous-valued data structures such as vectors & add & add & add "t" "e" "u" and images. Composing such graphs requires additional "c" "r" "e" "a" "p" information: "t" "r" When examining a pair of arcs (one from each input "d" graph), we need a criterion to decide whether to create cor- "c" 0.4 "x" 0.1 responding arc(s) and node(s) in the output graph, based "p" 0.2 on the information attached to the input arcs. We can de- "o" 1.0 "a" 0.2 Recognition Graph cide to build an arc, several arcs, or an entire sub-graph "d" 1.8 "u" 0.8 "t" 0.8 with several nodes and arcs. When that criterion is met, we must build the corre- Fig. the 28. Example of composition of the recognition graph with grammar graph in order to build an interpretation that is sponding arc(s) and node(s) in the output graph and com- consistent with both of them. During the forward propagation pute the information attached to the newly created arc(s) (dark arrows), the methods check and fprop are used. Gradients as a function the the information attached to the input (dashed arrows) are back-propagated with the application of the arcs. method bprop. These functions are encapsulated in an object called a Composition Transformer. An instance of Composition Transformer implements three methods: jectory is acceptable (i.e. both tokens simultaneously reach check(arc1, arc2) the end nodes of their graphs). The management of null compares the data structures pointed to by arcs arc1 (from transitions simulation is a straightforward modication of the token function. Before enumerating the possible non the rst graph) and arc2 (from the second graph) and re- null joint token transitions, we loop on the possible null turns a boolean indicating whether corresponding arc(s) transitions of each token, recursively call the token sim- should be created in the output graph. ulation function, and nally call the method fprop. The fprop(ngraph, upnode, downnode, arc1, arc2) safest way for identifying acceptable is called when check(arc1, arc2) returns true. This running a preliminary pass for identifying the token trajectories consists in method creates new arcs and nodes between nodes upnode gurations from which we can reach the terminal congu- con- and downnode in the output graph ngraph, and computes ration (i.e. both tokens on the end nodes). This is easily the information attached to these newly created arcs as a achieved by enumerating the trajectories in the opposite function of the attached information of the input arcs arc1 direction. We start on the end nodes and follow the arcs and arc2. upstream. During the main pass, we only build the nodes bprop(ngraph, upnode, downnode, arc1, arc2) is called during training in order to propagate gradient in- that allow the tokens to reach the terminal conguration. formation from the output sub-graph between upnode and Graph composition using transducers (i.e. standard downnode into the data structures on the arc1 and arc2, transduction) is easily and eciently implemented as a gen- as well as with respect to the parameters that were used in eralized transduction. The method check simply tests the the fprop call with the same arguments. This assumes that equality of the input symbols on the two arcs, and the the function used by fprop to compute the values attached method fprop creates a single arc whose symbol is the to its output arcs is di erentiable. output symbol on the transducer's arc. The check method can be seen as constructing a dy- The composition between pairs of graphs is particularly namic architecture of functional dependencies, while the useful for incorporating linguistic constraints in a hand- fprop method performs a forward propagation through writing recognizer. Examples of its use are given in the that architecture to compute the numerical information at- on-line handwriting recognition system described in Sec- tached to the arcs. The bprop method performs a back- tion IX) and in the check reading system described in Sec- ward propagation through the same architecture to com- tion X). pute the partial derivatives of the loss function with respect In the rest of the paper, the term Composition Trans- to the information attached to the arcs. This is illustrated former will denote a Graph Transformer based on the gen- in Figure 28. eralized transductions of multiple graphs. The concept of Figure 29 shows a simplied generalized graph composi- generalized transduction is a very general one. In fact, tion algorithm. This simplied algorithm does not handle many of the graph transformers described earlier in this null transitions, and does not check whether the tokens tra- paper, such as the segmenter and the recognizer, can be PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 33 formulated in terms of generalized transduction. In this case the, the generalized transduction does not take two in- put graphs but a single input graph. The method fprop of the transformer may create several arcs or even a complete Function generalized_composition(PGRAPH graph1, subgraph for each arc of the initial graph. In fact the pair PGRAPH graph2, (check, fprop) itself can be seen as procedurally dening PTRANS trans) a transducer. Returns PGRAPH In addition, It can be shown that the generalized trans- { duction of a single graph is theoretically equivalent to the // Create new graph standard composition of this graph with a particular trans- PGRAPH ngraph = new_graph() ducer graph. However, implementing the operation this way may be very inecient since the transducer can be // Create map between token positions very complicated. // and nodes of the new graph In practice, the graph produced by a generalized trans- PNODE mapPNODE,PNODE] = new_empty_map() duction is represented procedurally, in order to avoid build- mapendnode(graph1), endnode(graph2)] = ing the whole output graph (which may be huge when for endnode(newgraph) example the interpretation graph is composed with the grammar graph). We only instantiate the nodes which // Recursive subroutine for simulating tokens are visited by the search algorithm during recognition (e.g. Function simtokens(PNODE node1, PNODE node2) Viterbi). This strategy propagates the benets of pruning Returns PNODE algorithms (e.g. Beam Search) in all the Graph Transformer { Network. PNODE currentnode = mapnode1, node2] // Check if already visited If (currentnode == nil) D. Notes on the Graph Structures // Record new configuration currentnode = ngraph->create_node() Section VI has discussed the idea of global training mapnode1, node2] = currentnode by back-propagating gradient through simple graph trans- // Enumerate the possible non-null formers. The bprop method is the basis of the back- // joint token transitions propagation algorithm for generic graph transformers. A For ARC arc1 in down_arcs(node1) generalized composition transformer can be seen as dynam- For ARC arc2 in down_arcs(node2) ically establishing functional relationships between the nu- If (trans->check(arc1, arc2)) merical quantities on the input and output arcs. Once the PNODE newnode = check function has decided that a relationship should be es- simtokens(down_node(arc1), tablished, the fprop function implements the numerical re- down_node(arc2)) lationship. The check function establishes the structure of trans->fprop(ngraph, currentnode, the ephemeral network inside the composition transformer. newnode, arc1, arc2) Since fprop is assumed to be di erentiable, gradients can // Return node in composed graph be back-propagated through that structure. Most param- Return currentnode eters a ect the scores stored on the arcs of the successive } graphs of the system. A few threshold parameters may de- termine whether an arc appears or not in the graph. Since // Perform token simulation non existing arcs are equivalent to arcs with very large simtokens(startnode(graph1), startnode(graph2)) penalties, we only consider the case of parameters a ect- Delete map ing the penalties. Return ngraph In the kind of systems we have discussed until now (and } the application described in Section X), much of the knowl- edge about the structure of the graph that is produced by Fig. 29. Pseudo-code for a simplied generalized composition algo- a Graph Transformer is determined by the nature of the rithm. For simplifying the presentation, we do not handle null Graph Transformer, but it may also depend on the value transitions nor implement dead end avoidance. The two main component of the composition appear clearly here: (a) the re- of the parameters and on the input. It may also be interest- cursive function simtoken() enumerating the token trajectories, ing to consider Graph Transformer modules which attempt and, (b) the associative array map used for remembering which to learn the structure of the output graph. This might nodes of the composed graph have been visited. be considered a combinatorial problem and not amenable to Gradient-Based Learning, but a solution to this prob- lem is to generate a large graph that contains the graph candidates as sub-graphs, and then select the appropriate sub-graph. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 34 E. GTN and Hidden Markov Models arcs are simply added in order to obtain the complete out- GTNs can be seen as a generalization and an extension of put graph. The input values of the emission and transition HMMs. On the one hand, the probabilistic interpretation modules are read o the data structure on the input arcs can be either kept (with penalties being log-probabilities), of the IOHMM Graph Transformer. In practice, the out- pushed to the nal decision stage (with the di erence of the put graph may be very large, and needs not be completely constrained forward penalty and the unconstrained forward instantiated (i.e., it is pruned: only the low penalty paths penalty being interpreted as negative log-probabilities of are created). label sequences), or dropped altogether (the network just represents a decision surface for label sequences in input IX. An On-Line Handwriting Recognition System space). On the other hand, Graph Transformer Networks Natural handwriting is often a mixture of di erent extend HMMs by allowing to combine in a well-principled \styles", lower case printed, upper case, and cursive. A framework multiple levels of processing, or multiple mod- reliable recognizer for such handwriting would greatly im- els (e.g., Pereira et al. have been using the transducer prove interaction with pen-based devices, but its imple- framework for stacking HMMs representing di erent levels mentation presents new technical challenges. Characters of processing in automatic speech recognition 86]). taken in isolation can be very ambiguous, but consider- Unfolding a HMM in time yields a graph that is very sim- able information is available from the context of the whole ilar to our interpretation graph (at the nal stage of pro- word. We have built a word recognition system for pen- cessing of the Graph Transformer Network, before Viterbi based devices based on four main modules: a preprocessor recognition). It has nodes n(t i) associated to each time that normalizes a word, or word group, by tting a geomet- step t and state i in the model. The penalty ci for an arc rical model to the word structure$ a module that produces from n(t ; 1 j ) to n(t i) then corresponds to the nega- an \annotated image" from the normalized pen trajectory$ tive log-probability of emitting observed data ot at posi- a replicated convolutional neural network that spots and tion t and going from state j to state i in the time interval recognizes characters$ and a GTN that interprets the net- (t ; 1 t). With this probabilistic interpretation, the for- works output by taking word-level constraints into account. ward penalty is the negative logarithm of the likelihood of The network and the GTN are jointly trained to minimize whole observed data sequence (given the model). an error measure dened at the word level. In Section VI we mentioned that the collapsing phe- In this work, we have compared a system based on nomenon can occur when non-discriminative loss functions SDNNs (such as described in Section VII), and a system are used to train neural networks/HMM hybrid systems. based on Heuristic Over-Segmentation (such as described With classical HMMs with xed preprocessing, this prob- in Section V). Because of the sequential nature of the infor- lem does not occur because the parameters of the emission mation in the pen trajectory (which reveals more informa- and transition probability models are forced to satisfy cer- tion than the purely optical input from in image), Heuristic tain probabilistic constraints: the sum or the integral of Over-Segmentation can be very ecient in proposing can- the probabilities of a random variable over its possible val- didate character cuts, especially for non-cursive script. ues must be 1. Therefore, when the probability of certain events is increased, the probability of other events must au- A. Preprocessing tomatically be decreased. On the other hand, if the prob- abilistic assumptions in an HMM (or other probabilistic Input normalization reduces intra-character variability, model) are not realistic, discriminative training, discussed simplifying character recognition. We have used a word in Section VI, can improve performance as this has been normalization scheme 92] based on tting a geometrical clearly shown for speech recognition systems 48], 49], 50], model of the word structure. Our model has four \exi- 107], 108]. ble" lines representing respectively the ascenders line, the The Input-Output HMM model (IOHMM) 105], 109], core line, the base line and the descenders line. The lines is strongly related to graph transformers. Viewed as a are tted to local minima or maxima of the pen trajectory. probabilistic model, an IOHMM represents the conditional The parameters of the lines are estimated with a modied distribution of output sequences given input sequences (of version of the EM algorithm to maximize the joint prob- the same or a di erent length). It is parameterized from ability of observed points and parameter values, using a an emission probability module and a transition probabil- prior on parameters that prevents the lines from collapsing ity module. The emission probability module computes on each other. the conditional emission probability of an output variable The recognition of handwritten characters from a pen (given an input value and the value of discrete \state" vari- trajectory on a digitizing surface is often done in the time able). The transition probability module computes condi- domain 110], 44], 111]. Typically, trajectories are nor- tional transition probabilities of a change in the value of malized, and local geometrical or dynamical features are the \state" variable, given the an input value. Viewed as a extracted. The recognition may then be performed us- graph transformer, it assigns an output graph (representing ing curve matching 110], or other classication techniques a probability distribution over the sequences of the output such as TDNNs 44], 111]. While these representations variable) to each path in the input graph. All these output have several advantages, their dependence on stroke order- graphs have the same structure, and the penalties on their ing and individual writing styles makes them dicult to PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 35 "Script" "Script" Viterbi Graph Viterbi Graph Beam Search Beam Search Transformer Transformer Interpretation Graph Interpretation Graph Language Language Model Compose Compose Model Recognition Graph Recognition Graph Recognition Character Model Compose Transformer SDNN Output AMAP Graph SDNN AMAP Computation Transformer Segmentation Graph AMAP Segmentation Transformer AMAP Computation Normalized Word Normalized Word Word Normalization Word Normalization Fig. 30. An on-line handwriting recognition GTN based on heuristic Fig. 31. An on-line handwriting recognition GTN based on Space- over-segmentation Displacement Neural Network B. Network Architecture One of the best networks we found for both online and use in high accuracy, writer independent systems that in- o%ine character recognition is a 5-layer convolutional net- tegrate the segmentation with the recognition. work somewhat similar to LeNet-5 (Figure 2), but with multiple input planes and di erent numbers of units on the Since the intent of the writer is to produce a legible im- last two layers$ layer 1: convolution with 8 kernels of size age, it seems natural to preserve as much of the pictorial 3x3, layer 2: 2x2 sub-sampling, layer 3: convolution with nature of the signal as possible, while at the same time ex- 25 kernels of size 5x5, layer 4 convolution with 84 kernels ploit the sequential information in the trajectory. For this of size 4x4, layer 5: 2x1 sub-sampling, classication layer: purpose we have designed a representation scheme, called 95 RBF units (one per class in the full printable ASCII AMAP 38], where pen trajectories are represented by low- set). The distributed codes on the output are the same as resolution images in which each picture element contains for LeNet-5, except they are adaptive unlike with LeNet-5. information about the local properties of the trajectory. An When used in the heuristic over-segmentation system, the AMAP can be viewed as an \annotated image" in which input to above network consisted of an AMAP with ve each pixel is a 5-element feature vector: 4 features are as- planes, 20 rows and 18 columns. It was determined that sociated to four orientations of the pen trajectory in the this resolution was sucient for representing handwritten area around the pixel, and the fth one is associated to characters. In the SDNN version, the number of columns local curvature in the area around the pixel. A particu- was varied according to the width of the input word. Once larly useful feature of the AMAP representation is that it the number of sub-sampling layers and the sizes of the ker- makes very few assumptions about the nature of the input nels are chosen, the sizes of all the layers, including the trajectory. It does not depend on stroke ordering or writ- input, are determined unambiguously. The only architec- ing speed, and it can be used with all types of handwriting tural parameters that remain to be selected are the num- (capital, lower case, cursive, punctuation, symbols). Un- ber of feature maps in each layer, and the information as like many other representations (such as global features), to what feature map is connected to what other feature AMAPs can be computed for complete words without re- map. In our case, the sub-sampling rates were chosen as quiring segmentation. small as possible (2x2), and the kernels as small as pos- PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 36 sible in the rst layer (3x3) to limit the total number of In this application, the language model simply constrains connections. Kernel sizes in the upper layers are chosen to the nal output graph to represent sequences of character be as small as possible while satisfying the size constraints labels from a given dictionary. Furthermore, the interpre- mentioned above. Larger architectures did not necessarily tation graph is not actually completely instantiated: the perform better and required considerably more time to be only nodes created are those that are needed by the Beam trained. A very small architecture with half the input eld Search module. The interpretation graph is therefore rep- also performed worse, because of insucient input resolu- resented procedurally rather than explicitly. tion. Note that the input resolution is nonetheless much A crucial contribution of this research was the joint train- less than for optical character recognition, because the an- ing of all graph transformer modules within the network gle and curvature provide more information than would a with respect to a single criterion, as explained in Sec- single grey level at each pixel. tions VI and VIII. We used the Discriminative Forward loss function on the nal output graph: minimize the forward C. Network Training penalty of the constrained interpretation (i.e., along all the Training proceeded in two phases. First, we kept the \correct" paths) while maximizing the forward penalty of centers of the RBFs xed, and trained the network weights the whole interpretation graph (i.e., along all the paths). so as to minimize the output distance of the RBF unit During global training, the loss function was optimized corresponding to the correct class. This is equivalent to with the stochastic diagonal Levenberg-Marquardt proce- minimizing the mean-squared error between the previous dure described in Appendix C, that uses second derivatives layer and the center of the correct-class RBF. This boot- to compute optimal learning rates. This optimization op- strap phase was performed on isolated characters. In the erates on all the parameters in the system, most notably second phase, all the parameters, network weights and RBF the network weights and the RBF centers. centers were trained globally to minimize a discriminative criterion at the word level. D. Experimental Results With the Heuristic Over-Segmentation approach, the In the rst set of experiments, we evaluated the general- GTN was composed of four main Graph Transformers: ization ability of the neural network classier coupled with 1. The Segmentation Transformer performs the the word normalization preprocessing and AMAP input Heuristic Over-Segmentation, and outputs the segmenta- representation. All results are in writer independent mode tion graph. An AMAP is then computed for each image (di erent writers in training and testing). Initial train- attached to the arcs of this graph. ing on isolated characters was performed on a database of 2. The Character Recognition Transformer applies approximately 100,000 hand printed characters (95 classes the the convolutional network character recognizer to each of upper case, lower case, digits, and punctuation). Tests candidate segment, and outputs the recognition graph, on a database of isolated characters were performed sepa- with penalties and classes on each arc. rately on the four types of characters: upper case (2.99% 3. The Composition Transformer composes the recog- error on 9122 patterns), lower case (4.15% error on 8201 nition graph with a grammar graph representing a language patterns), digits (1.4% error on 2938 patterns), and punc- model incorporating lexical constraints. tuation (4.3% error on 881 patterns). Experiments were 4. The Beam Search Transformer extracts a good inter- performed with the network architecture described above. pretation from the interpretation graph. This task could To enhance the robustness of the recognizer to variations have been achieved with the usual Viterbi Transformer. in position, size, orientation, and other distortions, addi- The Beam Search algorithm however implements pruning tional training data was generated by applying local ane strategies which are appropriate for large interpretation transformations to the original characters. graphs. The second and third set of experiments concerned the With the SDNN approach, the main Graph Transformers recognition of lower case words (writer independent). The are the following: tests were performed on a database of 881 words. First 1. The SDNN Transformer replicates the convolutional we evaluated the improvements brought by the word nor- network over the a whole word image, and outputs a recog- malization to the system. For the SDNN/HMM system nition graph that is a linear graph with class penalties for we have to use word-level normalization since the net- every window centered at regular intervals on the input work sees one whole word at a time. With the Heuris- image. tic Over-Segmentation system, and before doing any word- 2. The Character-Level Composition Transformer level training, we obtained with character-level normaliza- composes the recognition graph with a left-to-right HMM tion 7.3% and 3.5% word and character errors (adding in- for each character class (as in Figure 27). sertions, deletions and substitutions) when the search was 3. The Word-Level Composition Transformer com- constrained within a 25461-word dictionary. When using poses the output of the previous transformer with a lan- the word normalization preprocessing instead of a charac- guage model incorporating lexical constraints, and outputs ter level normalization, error rates dropped to 4.6% and the interpretation graph. 2.0% for word and character errors respectively, i.e., a rel- 4. The Beam Search Transformer extracts a good in- ative drop of 37% and 43% in word and character error terpretation from the interpretation graph. respectively. This suggests that normalizing the word in PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 37 its entirety is better than rst segmenting it and then nor- the system as 50% correct / 49% reject / 1% error. The malizing and processing each of the segments. system presented here was one of the rst to cross that threshold on representative mixtures of business and per- SDNN/HMM no global training No Language Model sonal checks. 12.4 with global training 8.2 Checks contain at least two versions of the amount. The HOS No Language Model Courtesy amount is written with numerals, while the Legal no global training with global training 6.3 amount is written with letters. On business checks, which 8.5 are generally machine-printed, these amounts are relatively easy to read, but quite dicult to nd due to the lack of HOS 25K Word Lexicon no global training 2 with global training 1.4 standard for business check layout. On the other hand, these amounts on personal checks are easy to nd but much 0 5 10 15 Fig. 32. Comparative results (character error rates) showing the harder to read. improvement brought by global training on the SDNN/HMM For simplicity (and speed requirements), our initial task hybrid, and on the Heuristic Over-Segmentation system (HOS), without and with a 25461 words dictionary. is to read the Courtesy amount only. This task consists of two main steps: In the third set of experiments, we measured the im- The system has to nd, among all the elds (lines of provements obtained with the joint training of the neural text), the candidates that are the most likely to contain the network and the post-processor with the word-level crite- courtesy amount. This is obvious for many personal checks, rion, in comparison to training based only on the errors where the position of the amount is standardized. However, performed at the character level. After initial training on as already noted, nding the amount can be rather dicult individual characters as above, global word-level discrim- in business checks, even for the human eye. There are inative training was performed with a database of 3500 many strings of digits, such as the check number, the date, lower case words. For the SDNN/HMM system, without or even \not to exceed" amounts, that can be confused any dictionary constraints, the error rates dropped from with the actual amount. In many cases, it is very dicult 38% and 12.4% word and character error to 26% and 8.2% to decide which candidate is the courtesy amount before respectively after word-level training, i.e., a relative drop performing a full recognition. of 32% and 34%. For the Heuristic Over-Segmentation sys- In order to read (and choose) some Courtesy amount tem and a slightly improved architecture, without any dic- candidates, the system has to segment the elds into char- tionary constraints, the error rates dropped from 22.5% acters, read and score the candidate characters, and nally and 8.5% word and character error to 17% and 6.3% re- nd the best interpretation of the amount using contextual spectively, i.e., a relative drop of 24.4% and 25.6%. With a knowledge represented by a stochastic grammar for check 25461-word dictionary, errors dropped from 4.6% and 2.0% amounts. word and character errors to 3.2% and 1.4% respectively The GTN methodology was used to build a check amount after word-level training, i.e., a relative drop of 30.4% and reading system that handles both personal checks and busi- 30.0%. Even lower error rates can be obtained by dras- ness checks. tically reducing the size of the dictionary to 350 words, yielding 1.6% and 0.94% word and character errors. A. A GTN for Check Amount Recognition These results clearly demonstrate the usefulness of glob- ally trained Neural-Net/HMM hybrids for handwriting We now describe the successive graph transformations recognition. This conrms similar results obtained earlier that allow this network to read the check amount (cf. Fig- in speech recognition 77]. ure 33). Each Graph Transformer produces a graph whose paths encode and score the current hypotheses considered X. A Check Reading System at this stage of the system. This section describes a GTN based Check Reading Sys- The input to the system is a trivial graph with a single tem, intended for immediate industrial deployment. It also arc that carries the image of the whole check (cf. Figure 33). shows how the use of Gradient Based-Learning and GTNs The eld location transformer Tfield rst performs make this deployment fast and cost-e ective while yielding classical image analysis (including connected component an accurate and reliable solution. analysis, ink density histograms, layout analysis, etc...) The verication of the amount on a check is a task that and heuristically extracts rectangular zones that may con- is extremely time and money consuming for banks. As a tain the check amount. Tfield produces an output graph, consequence, there is a very high interest in automating the called the eld graph (cf. Figure 33) such that each can- process as much as possible (see for example 112], 113], didate zone is associated with one arc that links the start 114]). Even a partial automation would result in consid- node to the end node. Each arc contains the image of the erable cost reductions. The threshold of economic viability zone, and a penalty term computed from simple features for automatic check readers, as set by the bank, is when extracted from the zone (absolute position, size, aspect ra- 50% of the checks are read with less than 1% error. The tio, etc...). The penalty term is close to zero if the features other 50% of the check being rejected and sent to human suggest that the eld is a likely candidate, and is large if operators. In such a case, we describe the performance of the eld is deemed less likely to be an amount. The penalty PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 38 Viterbi Answer The segmenter uses a variety of heuristics to nd candi- date cut. One of the most important ones is called \hit and Best Amount Graph deect" 115]. The idea is to cast lines downward from the top of the eld image. When a line hits a black pixel, it is Viterbi Transformer deected so as to follow the contour of the object. When a "$" 0.2 line hits a local minimum of the upper prole, i.e. when it Interpretation Graph "*" 0.4 "3" 0.1 cannot continue downward without crossing a black pixel, it is just propagated vertically downward through the ink. ....... Grammar Compose When two such lines meet each other, they are merged into a single cut. The procedure can be repeated from the bot- tom up. This strategy allows the separation of touching "$" 0.2 "*" 0.4 Recognition Graph "3" 0.1 "B" 23.6 ....... characters such as double zeros. Recognition The recognition transformer Trec iterates over all Transformer segment arcs in the segmentation graph and runs a charac- $ * 3 ter recognizer on the corresponding segment image. In our Segmentation Graph ** 45 case, the recognizer is LeNet-5, the Convolutional Neural Segmentation Transf. Network described in Section II, whose weights constitute the largest and most important subset of tunable parame- Field Graph 45/xx $ *** 3.45 ters. The recognizer classies segment images into one of 95 classes (full printable ASCII set) plus a rubbish class for $10,000.00 Field Location Transf. unknown symbols or badly-formed characters. Each arc in Check Graph 2nd Nat. Bank not to exceed $10,000.00 $ *** 3.45 the input graph Trec is replaced by 96 arcs in the output graph. Each of those 96 arcs contains the label of one of three dollars and 45/xx Fig. 33. A complete check amount reader implemented as a single the classes, and a penalty that is the sum of the penalty cascade of Graph Transformer modules. Successive graph trans- of the corresponding arc in the input (segmentation) graph formations progressively extract higher level information. and the penalty associated with classifying the image in the corresponding class, as computed by the recognizer. In other words, the recognition graph represents a weighted function is di erentiable, therefore its parameter are glob- trellis of scored character classes. Each path in this graph ally tunable. represents a possible character string for the correspond- An arc may represent separate dollar and cent amounts ing eld. We can compute a penalty for this interpretation as a sequence of elds. In fact, in handwritten checks, the by adding the penalties along the path. This sequence of cent amount may be written over a fractional bar, and not characters may or may not be a valid check amount. aligned at all with the dollar amount. In the worst case, The composition transformer Tgram selects the one may nd several cent amount candidates (above and paths of the recognition graph that represent valid char- below the fraction bar) for the same dollar amount. acter sequences for check amounts. This transformer takes The segmentation transformer Tseg , similar to the two graphs as input: the recognition graph, and the gram- one described in Section VIII examines each zone contained mar graph. The grammar graph contains all possible se- in the eld graph, and cuts each image into pieces of ink quences of symbols that constitute a well-formed amount. using heuristic image processing techniques. Each piece The output of the composition transformer, called the in- of ink may be a whole character or a piece of character. terpretation graph, contains all the paths in the recognition Each arc in the eld graph is replaced by its correspond- graph that are compatible with the grammar. The oper- ing segmentation graph that represents all possible group- ation that combines the two input graphs to produce the ings of pieces of ink. Each eld segmentation graph is ap- output is a generalized transduction (see Section VIII).A pended to an arc that contains the penalty of the eld in di erentiable function is used to compute the data attached the eld graph. Each arc carries the segment image, to- to the output arc from the data attached to the input arcs. gether with a penalty that provides a rst evaluation of In our case, the output arc receives the class label of the the likelihood that the segment actually contains a charac- two arcs, and a penalty computed by simply summing the ter. This penalty is obtained with a di erentiable function penalties of the two input arcs (the recognizer penalty, and that combines a few simple features such as the space be- the arc penalty in the grammar graph). Each path in the tween the pieces of ink or the compliance of the segment interpretation graph represents one interpretation of one image with a global baseline, and a few tunable parame- segmentation of one eld on the check. The sum of the ters. The segmentation graph represents all the possible penalties along the path represents the \badness" of the segmentations of all the eld images. We can compute the corresponding interpretation and combines evidence from penalty for one segmented eld by adding the arc penalties each of the modules along the process, as well as from the along the corresponding path. As before using a di eren- grammar. tiable function for computing the penalties will ensure that The Viterbi transformer nally selects the path with the parameters can be optimized globally. the lowest accumulated penalty, corresponding to the best PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 39 Edforw as described in Figure 21, using as our desired sequence the Viterbi answer. This is summarized in Figure 34, with: + Cdforw − condence = exp(E dforw ) Cforw Forward Scorer D. Results Forward Scorer A version of the above system was fully implemented and tested on machine-print business checks. This sys- tem is basically a generic GTN engine with task specic Viterbi Answer Path Selector Interpretation Graph heuristics encapsulated in the check and fprop method. As a consequence, the amount of code to write was min- Fig. 34. Additional processing required to compute the condence. imal: mostly the adaptation of an earlier segmenter into the segmentation transformer. The system that deals with hand-written or personal checks was based on earlier im- grammatically correct interpretations. plementations that used the GTN concept in a restricted way. B. Gradient-Based Learning The neural network classier was initially trained on Each stage of this check reading system contains tun- 500,000 images of character images from various origins able parameters. While some of these parameters could be spanning the entire printable ASCII set. This contained manually adjusted, for example the parameters of the eld both handwritten and machine-printed characters that had locator and segmenter, the vast majority of them must be been previously size normalized at the string level. Addi- learned, particularly the weights of the neural net recog- tional images were generated by randomly distorting the nizer. original images using simple ane transformations of the Prior to globally optimizing the system, each module pa- images. The network was then further trained on character rameters are initialized with reasonable values. The param- images that had been automatically segmented from check eters of the eld locator and the segmenter are initialized images and manually truthed. The network was also ini- by hand, while the parameters of the neural net charac- tially trained to reject non-characters that resulted from ter recognizer are initialized by training on a database of segmentation errors. The recognizer was then inserted in pre-segmented and labeled characters. Then, the entire the check reading system and a small subset of the parame- system is trained globally from whole check images labeled ters were trained globally (at the eld level) on whole check with the correct amount. No explicit segmentation of the images. amounts is needed to train the system: it is trained at the On 646 business checks that were automatically catego- check level. rized as machine printed the performance was 82% cor- The loss function E minimized by our global train- rectly recognized checks, 1% errors, and 17% rejects. This ing procedure is the Discriminative Forward criterion de- can be compared to the performance of the previous sys- scribed in Section VI: the di erence between (a) the for- tem on the same test set: 68% correct, 1% errors, and ward penalty of the constrained interpretation graph (con- 31% rejects. A check is categorized as machine-printed strained by the correct label sequence), and (b) the forward when characters that are near a standard position Dollar penalty of the unconstrained interpretation graph. Deriva- sign are detected as machine printed, or when, if nothing tives can be back-propagated through the entire structure, is found in the standard position, at least one courtesy although it only practical to do it down to the segmenter. amount candidate is found somewhere else. The improve- ment is attributed to three main causes. First the neural C. Rejecting Low Condence Checks network recognizer was bigger, and trained on more data. In order to be able to reject checks which are the most Second, because of the GTN architecture, the new system likely to carry erroneous Viterbi answers, we must rate could take advantage of grammatical constraints in a much them with a condence, and reject the check if this con- more ecient way than the previous system. Third, the dence is below a given threshold. To compare the un- GTN architecture provided extreme exibility for testing normalized Viterbi Penalties of two di erent checks would heuristics, adjusting parameters, and tuning the system. be meaningless when it comes to decide which answer we This last point is more important than it seems. The GTN trust the most. framework separates the \algorithmic" part of the system The optimal measure of condence is the probability of from the \knowledge-based" part of the system, allowing the Viterbi answer given the input image. As seen in Sec- easy adjustments of the latter. The importance of global tion VI-E, given a target sequence (which, in this case, training was only minor in this task because the global would be the Viterbi answer), the discriminative forward training only concerned a small subset of the parameters. loss function is an estimate of the logarithm of this prob- An independent test performed by systems integrators ability. Therefore, a simple solution to obtain a good esti- in 1995 showed the superiority of this system over other mate of the condence is to reuse the interpretation graph commercial Courtesy amount reading systems. The system (see Figure 33) to compute the discriminative forward loss was integrated in NCR's line of check reading systems. It PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 40 has been elded in several banks across the US since June Neural Networks allows to learn appropriate features from 1996, and has been reading millions of checks per day since examples. The success of this approach was demonstrated then. in extensive comparative digit recognition experiments on the NIST database. XI. Conclusions 2. Segmentation and recognition of objects in images can- During the short history of automatic pattern recogni- not be completely decoupled. Instead of taking hard seg- tion, increasing the role of learning seems to have invari- mentation decisions too early, we have used Heuristic Over- ably improved the overall performance of recognition sys- Segmentation to generate and evaluate a large number of tems. The systems described in this paper are more ev- hypotheses in parallel, postponing any decision until the idence to this fact. Convolutional Neural Networks have overall criterion is minimized. been shown to eliminate the need for hand-crafted fea- 3. Hand truthing images to obtain segmented characters ture extractors. Graph Transformer Networks have been for training a character recognizer is expensive and does shown to reduce the need for hand-crafted heuristics, man- not take into account the way in which a whole document ual labeling, and manual parameter tuning in document or sequence of characters will be recognized (in particular recognition systems. As training data becomes plentiful, as the fact that some segmentation candidates may be wrong, computers get faster, as our understanding of learning al- even though they may look like true characters). Instead gorithms improves, recognition systems will rely more and we train multi-module systems to optimize a global mea- more of learning, and their performance will improve. sure of performance, which does not require time consum- Just as the back-propagation algorithm elegantly solved ing detailed hand-truthing, and yields signicantly better the credit assignment problem in multi-layer neural net- recognition performance, because it allows to train these works, the gradient-based learning procedure for Graph modules to cooperate towards a common goal. Transformer Networks introduced in this paper solves the 4. Ambiguities inherent in the segmentation, character credit assignment problem in systems whose functional ar- recognition, and linguistic model should be integrated op- chitecture dynamically changes with each new input. The timally. Instead of using a sequence of task-dependent learning algorithms presented here are in a sense nothing heuristics to combine these sources of information, we more than unusual forms of gradient descent in complex, have proposed a unied framework in which generalized dynamic architectures, with ecient back-propagation al- transduction methods are applied to graphs representing a gorithms to compute the gradient. The results in this pa- weighted set of hypotheses about the input. The success of per help establish the usefulness and relevance of gradient- this approach was demonstrated with a commercially de- based minimization methods as a general organizing prin- ployed check reading system that reads millions of business ciple for learning in large systems. and personal checks per day: the generalized transduction It was shown that all the steps of a document analysis engine resides in only a few hundred lines of code. system can be formulated as graph transformers through 5. Traditional recognition systems rely on many hand- which gradients can be back-propagated. Even in the crafted heuristics to isolate individually recognizable ob- non-trainable parts of the system, the design philosophy jects. The promising Space Displacement Neural Network in terms of graph transformation provides a clear separa- approach draws on the robustness and eciency of Con- tion between domain-specic heuristics (e.g. segmentation volutional Neural Networks to avoid explicit segmentation heuristics) and generic, procedural knowledge (the gener- altogether. Simultaneous automatic learning of segmenta- alized transduction algorithm) tion and recognition can be achieved with Gradient-Based It is worth pointing out that data generating models Learning methods. (such as HMMs) and the Maximum Likelihood Principle This paper presents a small number of examples of graph were not called upon to justify most of the architectures transformer modules, but it is clear that the concept can be and the training criteria described in this paper. Gradient applied to many situations where the domain knowledge or based learning applied to global discriminative loss func- the state information can be represented by graphs. This is tions guarantees optimal classication and rejection with- the case in many audio signal recognition tasks, and visual out the use of \hard to justify" principles that put strong scene analysis applications. Future work will attempt to constraints on the system architecture, often at the expense apply Graph Transformer Networks to such problems, with of performances. the hope of allowing more reliance on automatic learning, More specically, the methods and architectures pre- and less on detailed engineering. sented in this paper o er generic solutions to a large num- Appendices ber of problems encountered in pattern recognition sys- tems: A. Pre-conditions for faster convergence 1. Feature extraction is traditionally a xed transform, As seen before, the squashing function used in our Con- generally derived from some expert prior knowledge about volutional Networks is f (a) = A tanh(Sa). Symmetric the task. This relies on the probably incorrect assumption functions are believed to yield faster convergence, although that the human designer is able to capture all the rele- the learning can become extremely slow if the weights are vant information in the input. We have shown that the too small. The cause of this problem is that in weight space application of Gradient-Based Learning to Convolutional the origin is a xed point of the learning dynamics, and, PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 41 although it is a saddle point, it is attractive in almost allperforming two complete learning iterations over the small directions 116]. For our simulations, we use A = 1:7159 subset. This idea can be generalized to training sets where and S = (see 20], 34]). With this choice of parame- 2 there exist no precise repetition of the same pattern but ters, the equalities f (1) = 1 and f (;1) = ;1 are satised. where some redundancy is present. In fact stochastic up- 3 The rationale behind this is that the overall gain of the date must be better when there is redundancy, i.e., when a squashing transformation is around 1 in normal operat- certain level of generalization is expected. ing conditions, and the interpretation of the state of the Many authors have claimed that second-order meth- network is simplied. Moreover, the absolute value of the ods should be used in lieu of gradient descent for neu- second derivative of f is a maximum at +1 and ;1, which ral net training. The literature abounds with recom- improves the convergence towards the end of the learning mendations 118] for classical second-order methods such session. This particular choice of parameters is merely a as the Gauss-Newton or Levenberg-Marquardt algorithms, convenience, and does not a ect the result. for Quasi-Newton methods such as the Broyden-Fletcher- Before training, the weights are initialized with random Goldfarb-Shanno method (BFGS), Limited-storage BFGS, values using a uniform distribution between ;2:4=Fi and or for various versions of the Conjugate Gradients (CG) 2:4=Fi where Fi is the number of inputs (fan-in) of the unit method. Unfortunately, all of the above methods are un- which the connection belongs to. Since several connections suitable for training large neural networks on large data share a weight, this rule could be dicult to apply, but in sets. The Gauss-Newton and Levenberg-Marquardt meth- our case, all connections sharing a same weight belong to ods require O(N ) operations per update, where N is 3 units with identical fan-ins. The reason for dividing by the the number of parameters, which makes them impracti- fan-in is that we would like the initial standard deviation cal for even moderate size networks. Quasi-Newton meth- of the weighted sums to be in the same range for each ods require \only" O(N ) operations per update, but that 2 unit, and to fall within the normal operating region of the still makes them impractical for large networks. Limited- sigmoid. If the initial weights are too small, the gradients Storage BFGS and Conjugate Gradient require only O(N ) are very small and the learning is slow. If they are too operations per update so they would appear appropriate. large, the sigmoids are saturated and the gradient is also Unfortunately, their convergence speed relies on an accu- very small. The standard deviation of the weighted sum rate evaluation of successive \conjugate descent directions" scales like the square root of the number of inputs when which only makes sense in \batch" mode. For large data the inputs are independent, and it scales linearly with the sets, the speed-up brought by these methods over regular number of inputs if the inputs are highly correlated. We batch gradient descent cannot match the enormous speed chose to assume the second hypothesis since some units up brought by the use of stochastic gradient. Several au- receive highly correlated signals. thors have attempted to use Conjugate Gradient with small batches, or batches of increasing sizes 119], 120], but those B. Stochastic Gradient vs Batch Gradient attempts have not yet been demonstrated to surpass a care- Gradient-Based Learning algorithms can use one of two fully tuned stochastic gradient. Our experiments were per- classes of methods to update the parameters. The rst formed with a stochastic method that scales the parameter method, dubbed \Batch Gradient", is the classical one: the axes so as to minimize the eccentricity of the error surface. gradients are accumulated over the entire training set, and C. Stochastic Diagonal Levenberg-Marquardt the parameters are updated after the exact gradient has been so computed. In the second method, called \Stochas- Owing to the reasons given in Appendix B, we prefer to tic Gradient", a partial, or noisy, gradient is evaluated on update the weights after each presentation of a single pat- the basis of one single training sample (or a small num- tern in accordance with stochastic update methods. The ber of samples), and the parameters are updated using patterns are presented in a constant random order, and the this approximate gradient. The training samples can be training set is typically repeated 20 times. selected randomly or according to a properly randomized Our update algorithm is dubbed the Stochastic Diagonal sequence. In the stochastic version, the gradient estimates Levenberg-Marquardt method where an individual learning are noisy, but the parameters are updated much more often rate (step size) is computed for each parameter (weight) than with the batch version. An empirical result of con- before each pass through the training set 20], 121], 34]. siderable practical importance is that on tasks with large, These learning rates are computed using the diagonal terms redundant data sets, the stochastic version is considerably of an estimate of the Gauss-Newton approximation to the faster than the batch version, sometimes by orders of mag- Hessian (second derivative) matrix. This algorithm is not nitude 117]. Although the reasons for this are not totally believed to bring a tremendous increase in learning speed understood theoretically, an intuitive explanation can be but it converges reliably without requiring extensive ad- found in the following extreme example. Let us take an justments of the learning parameters. It corrects major ill- example where the training database is composed of two conditioning of the loss function that are due to the pecu- copies of the same subset. Then accumulating the gradient liarities of the network architecture and the training data. over the whole set would cause redundant computations The additional cost of using this procedure over standard to be performed. On the other hand, running Stochas- stochastic gradient descent is negligible. tic Gradient once on this training set would amount to At each learning iteration a particular parameter wk is PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 42 updated according to the following stochastic update rule the total input to unit i (denoted ai ). Interestingly, there is p an ecient algorithm to compute those second derivatives wk  wk ; k @E @wk : (18) which is very similar to the back-propagation procedure used to compute the rst derivatives 20], 121]: p where E is the instantaneous loss function for pattern p. 2 @ E p = f 0 (a ) X u @ E p + f 00 (a ) @E p 2 (26) In Convolutional Neural Networks, because of the weight @ai i2 2 ki @a i @x i sharing, the partial derivative @E k 2 2 p @wk is the sum of the partial k derivatives with respect to the connections that share the Unfortunately, using those derivatives leads to well-known parameter wk : @E p = X @E p problems associated with every Newton-like algorithm: @wk ij 2Vk @uij (19) these terms can be negative, and can cause the gradient algorithm to move uphill instead of downhill. Therefore, our second approximation is a well-known trick, called the ( ) where uij is the connection weight from unit j to unit i, Vk Gauss-Newton approximation, which guarantees that the is the set of unit index pairs (i j ) such that the connection second derivative estimates are non-negative. The Gauss- between i and j share the parameter wk , i.e.: Newton approximation essentially ignores the non-linearity uij = wk 8(i j ) 2 Vk (20) of the estimated function (the Neural Network in our case), but not that of the loss function. The back-propagation As stated previously, the step sizes k are not constant but equation for Gauss-Newton approximations of the second are function of the second derivative of the loss function derivatives is: along the axis wk : 2 @ E p = f 0 (a ) X u @ E p2 (27) @ai i 2 ki @a 2 k 2 2 k = + h (21) k kk This is very similar to the formula for back-propagating the where is a hand-picked constant and hkk is an estimate rst derivatives, except that the sigmoid's derivative and of the second derivative of the loss function E with re- the weight values are squared. The right-hand side is a sum spect to wk . The larger hkk , the smaller the weight update. of products of non-negative terms, therefore the left-hand The parameter prevents the step size from becoming too side term is non-negative. large when the second derivative is small, very much like The third approximation we make is that we do not run the \model-trust" methods, and the Levenberg-Marquardt the average in Equation 24 over the entire training set, but methods in non-linear optimization 8]. The exact formula run it on a small subset of the training set instead. In to compute hkk from the second derivatives with respect addition the re-estimation does not need to be done of- to the connection weights is: ten since the second order properties of the error surface hkk = X X @ E change rather slowly. In the experiments described in this (22) paper, we re-estimate the hkk on 500 patterns before each 2 ij 2Vk kl 2Vk @u ij @u kl training pass through the training set. Since the size of the training set is 60,000, the additional cost of re-estimating ( ) ( ) However, we make three approximations. The rst approx- the hkk is negligible. The estimates are not particularly imation is to drop the o -diagonal terms of the Hessian sensitive to the particular subset of the training set used in with respect to the connection weights in the above equa- the averaging. This seems to suggest that the second-order tion: hkk = X @E 2 (23) properties of the error surface are mainly determined by the structure of the network, rather than by the detailed ij 2Vk @uij statistics of the samples. This algorithm is particularly use- 2 ( ) ful for shared-weight networks because the weight sharing @ 2 E2 are the average over the training creates ill-conditionning of the error surface. Because of Naturally, the terms @u ij set of the local second derivatives: the sharing, one single parameter in the rst few layers can have an enormous inuence on the output. Consequently, @E=1X 2 P @ Ep 2 (24) the second derivative of the error with respect to this pa- @uij P p @uij 2 2 rameter may be very large, while it can be quite small for =1 other parameters elsewhere in the network. The above al- Those local second derivatives with respect to connection gorithm compensates for that phenomenon. weights can be computed from local second derivatives with Unlike most other second-order acceleration methods for respect to the total input of the downstream unit: back-propagation, the above method works in stochastic mode. It uses a diagonal approximation of the Hessian. @ Ep = @ Ep x 2 2 (25) Like the classical Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, it uses a @ai j 2 @uij 2 2 \safety" factor to prevent the step sizes from getting too 2 p large if the second derivative estimates are small. Hence where xj is the state of unit j and @@aE2i is the second the method is called the Stochastic Diagonal Levenberg- derivative of the instantaneous loss function with respect to Marquardt method. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 43 Acknowledgments E. Bienenstock, F. Fogelman-Soulie, and G. Weisbuch, Eds., Les Houches, France, 1986, pp. 233{240, Springer-Verlag. Some of the systems described in this paper is the work 19] D. B. Parker, \Learning-logic," Tech. Rep., TR-47, Sloan of many researchers now at AT&T, and Lucent Technolo- School of Management, MIT, Cambridge, Mass., April 1985. gies. In particular, Christopher Burges, Craig Nohl, Troy 20] Y. LeCun, Modeles connexionnistes de l'apprentissage (con- nectionist learning models), Ph.D. thesis, Universite P. et M. Cauble and Jane Bromley contributed much to the check Curie (Paris 6), June 1987. reading system. Experimental results described in sec- 21] Y. LeCun, \A theoretical framework for back-propagation," in tion III include contributions by Chris Burges, Aymeric Proceedings of the 1988 Connectionist Models Summer School, D. Touretzky, G. Hinton, and T. Sejnowski, Eds., CMU, Pitts- Brunot, Corinna Cortes, Harris Drucker, Larry Jackel, Urs burgh, Pa, 1988, pp. 21{28, Morgan Kaufmann. M"uller, Bernhard Sch"olkopf, and Patrice Simard. The au- 22] L. Bottou and P. Gallinari, \A framework for the cooperation of thors wish to thank Fernando Pereira, Vladimir Vapnik, learning algorithms," in Advances in Neural Information Pro- cessing Systems, D. Touretzky and R. Lippmann, Eds., Denver, John Denker, and Isabelle Guyon for helpful discussions, 1991, vol. 3, Morgan Kaufmann. Charles Stenard and Ray Higgins for providing the appli- 23] C. Y. Suen, C. Nadal, R. Legault, T. A. Mai, and L. Lam, cations that motivated some of this work, and Lawrence R. \Computer recognition of unconstrained handwritten numer- als," Proceedings of the IEEE, Special issue on Optical Char- Rabiner and Lawrence D. Jackel for relentless support and acter Recognition, vol. 80, no. 7, pp. 1162{1180, July 1992. encouragements. 24] S. N. Srihari, \High-performance reading machines," Proceed- ings of the IEEE, Special issue on Optical Character Recogni- tion, vol. 80, no. 7, pp. 1120{1132, July 1992. References 25] Y. LeCun, L. D. Jackel, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, H. P. Graf, 1] R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern Classication And Scene I. Guyon, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, and W. Hubbard, Analysis, Wiley and Son, 1973. \Handwritten digit recognition: Applications of neural net 2] Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, chips and automatic learning," IEEE Communication, pp. 41{ W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, \Backpropagation applied to 46, November 1989, invited paper. handwritten zip code recognition," Neural Computation, vol. 26] J. Keeler, D. Rumelhart, and W. K. Leow, \Integrated seg- 1, no. 4, pp. 541{551, Winter 1989. mentation and recognition of hand-printed numerals," in Neu- 3] S. Seung, H. Sompolinsky, and N. Tishby, \Statistical mechan- ral Information Processing Systems, R. P. Lippmann, J. M. ics of learning from examples," Physical Review A, vol. 45, pp. Moody, and D. S. Touretzky, Eds., vol. 3, pp. 557{563. Morgan 6056{6091, 1992. Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, CA, 1991. 4] V. N. Vapnik, E. Levin, and Y. LeCun, \Measuring the vc- 27] Ofer Matan, Christopher J. C. Burges, Yann LeCun, and dimension of a learning machine," Neural Computation, vol. 6, John S. Denker, \Multi-digit recognition using a space dis- no. 5, pp. 851{876, 1994. placement neural network," in Neural Information Processing 5] C. Cortes, L. Jackel, S. Solla, V. N. Vapnik, and J. Denker, Systems, J. M. Moody, S. J. Hanson, and R. P. Lippman, Eds. \Learning curves: asymptotic values and rate of convergence," 1992, vol. 4, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, CA. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6, J. D. 28] L. R. Rabiner, \A tutorial on hidden Markov models and se- Cowan, G. Tesauro, and J. Alspector, Eds., San Mateo, CA, lected applications in speech recognition," Proceedings of the 1994, pp. 327{334, Morgan Kaufmann. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257{286, February 1989. 6] V. N. Vapnik, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory, 29] H. A. Bourlard and N. Morgan, CONNECTIONIST SPEECH Springer, New-York, 1995. RECOGNITION: A Hybrid Approach, Kluwer Academic Pub- 7] V. N. Vapnik, Statistical Learning Theory, John Wiley & Sons, lisher, Boston, 1994. New-York, 1998. 30] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, \Receptive elds, binocular 8] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T. Vet- interaction, and functional architecture in the cat's visual cor- terling, Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientic Computing, tex," Journal of Physiology (London), vol. 160, pp. 106{154, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986. 1962. 9] S. I. Amari, \A theory of adaptive pattern classiers," IEEE 31] K. Fukushima, \Cognitron: A self-organizing multilayered neu- Transactions on Electronic Computers, vol. EC-16, pp. 299{ ral network," Biological Cybernetics, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 121{136, 307, 1967. November 1975. 10] Ya. Tsypkin, Adaptation and Learning in automatic systems, 32] K. Fukushima and S. Miyake, \Neocognitron: A new algorithm Academic Press, 1971. for pattern recognition tolerant of deformations and shifts in 11] Ya. Tsypkin, Foundations of the theory of learning systems, position," Pattern Recognition, vol. 15, pp. 455{469, 1982. Academic Press, 1973. 33] M. C. Mozer, The perception of multiple objects: A connec- 12] M. Minsky and O. Selfridge, \Learning in random nets," in tionist approach, MIT Press-Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 4th London symposium on Information Theory, London, 1961, 1991. pp. 335{347. 34] Y. LeCun, \Generalization and network design strategies," in 13] D. H. Ackley, G. E. Hinton, and T. J. Sejnowski, \A learning Connectionism in Perspective, R. Pfeifer, Z. Schreter, F. Fogel- algorithm for boltzmann machines," Cognitive Science, vol. 9, man, and L. Steels, Eds., Zurich, Switzerland, 1989, Elsevier, pp. 147{169, 1985. an extended version was published as a technical report of the 14] G. E. Hinton and T. J. Sejnowski, \Learning and relearning University of Toronto. in Boltzmann machines," in Parallel Distributed Processing: 35] Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 1: W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, \Handwritten digit recognition Foundations, D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland, Eds. MIT with a back-propagation network," in Advances in Neural In- Press, Cambridge, MA, 1986. formation Processing Systems 2 (NIPS*89), David Touretzky, 15] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, \Learning Ed., Denver, CO, 1990, Morgan Kaufmann. internal representations by error propagation," in Parallel dis- 36] G. L. Martin, \Centered-object integrated segmentation and tributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cog- recognition of overlapping hand-printed characters," Neural nition, vol. I, pp. 318{362. Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, Computation, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 419{429, 1993. 1986. 37] J. Wang and J Jean, \Multi-resolution neural networks for om- 16] A. E. Jr. Bryson and Yu-Chi Ho, Applied Optimal Control, nifont character recognition," in Proceedings of International Blaisdell Publishing Co., 1969. Conference on Neural Networks, 1993, vol. III, pp. 1588{1593. 17] Y. LeCun, \A learning scheme for asymmetric threshold net- 38] Y. Bengio, Y. LeCun, C. Nohl, and C. Burges, \Lerec: A works," in Proceedings of Cognitiva 85, Paris, France, 1985, NN/HMM hybrid for on-line handwriting recognition," Neural pp. 599{604. Computation, vol. 7, no. 5, 1995. 18] Y. LeCun, \Learning processes in an asymmetric threshold 39] S. Lawrence, C. Lee Giles, A. C. Tsoi, and A. D. Back, \Face network," in Disordered systems and biological organization, recognition: A convolutional neural network approach," IEEE PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 44 Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 98{113, son, J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles, Eds., San Mateo, CA, 1993, 1997. pp. 42{49, Morgan Kaufmann. 40] K. J. Lang and G. E. Hinton, \A time delay neural network 61] P. Simard, Y. LeCun, and Denker J., \E!cient pattern recog- architecture for speech recognition," Tech. Rep. CMU-CS-88- nition using a new transformation distance," in Advances in 152, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, 1988. Neural Information Processing Systems, S. Hanson, J. Cowan, 41] A. H. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shikano, and and L. Giles, Eds., vol. 5. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. K. Lang, \Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural net- 62] B. Boser, I. Guyon, and V. Vapnik, \A training algorithm for works," IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal optimal margin classiers," in Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Processing, vol. 37, pp. 328{339, March 1989. Workshop on Computational Learning Theory, 1992, vol. 5, pp. 42] L. Bottou, F. Fogelman, P. Blanchet, and J. S. Lienard, 144{152. \Speaker independent isolated digit recognition: Multilayer 63] C. J. C. Burges and B. Schoelkopf, \Improving the accuracy perceptron vs dynamic time warping," Neural Networks, vol. and speed of support vector machines," in Advances in Neural 3, pp. 453{465, 1990. Information Processing Systems 9, M. Jordan M. Mozer and 43] P. Ha ner and A. H. Waibel, \Time-delay neural networks T. Petsche, Eds. 1997, The MIT Press, Cambridge. embedding time alignment: a performance analysis," in EU- 64] Eduard Sackinger, Bernhard Boser, Jane Bromley, Yann Le- ROSPEECH'91, 2nd European Conference on Speech Commu- Cun, and Lawrence D. Jackel, \Application of the ANNA neu- nication and Technology, Genova, Italy, Sept. 1991. ral network chip to high-speed character recognition," IEEE 44] I. Guyon, P. Albrecht, Y. LeCun, J. S. Denker, and W. Hub- Transaction on Neural Networks, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 498{505, bard, \Design of a neural network character recognizer for a March 1992. touch terminal," Pattern Recognition, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 105{ 65] J. S. Bridle, \Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classi- 119, 1991. cation networks outputs, with relationship to statistical pattern 45] J. Bromley, J. W. Bentz, L. Bottou, I. Guyon, Y. LeCun, recognition," in Neurocomputing, Algorithms, Architectures C. Moore, E. Sackinger, and R. Shah, \Signature verica- and Applications, F. Fogelman, J. Herault, and Y. Burnod, tion using a siamese time delay neural network," International Eds., Les Arcs, France, 1989, Springer. Journal of Pattern Recognition and Articial Intelligence, vol. 66] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, and Y. Bengio, \Reading checks with 7, no. 4, pp. 669{687, August 1993. graph transformer networks," in International Conference on 46] Y. LeCun, I. Kanter, and S. Solla, \Eigenvalues of covariance Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Munich, 1997, vol. 1, matrices: application to neural-network learning," Physical pp. 151{154, IEEE. Review Letters, vol. 66, no. 18, pp. 2396{2399, May 1991. 67] Y. Bengio, Neural Networks for Speech and Sequence Recogni- 47] T. G. Dietterich and G. Bakiri, \Solving multiclass learning tion, International Thompson Computer Press, London, UK, problems via error-correcting output codes.," Journal of Arti- 1996. cial Intelligence Research, vol. 2, pp. 263{286, 1995. 68] C. Burges, O. Matan, Y. LeCun, J. Denker, L. Jackel, C. Ste- 48] L. R. Bahl, P. F. Brown, P. V. de Souza, and R. L. Mercer, nard, C. Nohl, and J. Ben, \Shortest path segmentation: A \Maximum mutual information of hidden Markov model pa- method for training a neural network to recognize character rameters for speech recognition," in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust., strings," in International Joint Conference on Neural Net- Speech, Signal Processing, 1986, pp. 49{52. works, Baltimore, 1992, vol. 3, pp. 165{172. 49] L. R. Bahl, P. F. Brown, P. V. de Souza, and R. L. Mercer, 69] T. M. Breuel, \A system for the o -line recognition of hand- \Speech recognition with continuous-parameter hidden Markov written text," in ICPR'94, IEEE, Ed., Jerusalem 1994, 1994, models," Computer, Speech and Language, vol. 2, pp. 219{234, pp. 129{134. 1987. 70] A. Viterbi, \Error bounds for convolutional codes and an 50] B. H. Juang and S. Katagiri, \Discriminative learning for min- asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm," IEEE Trans- imum error classication," IEEE Trans. on Acoustics, Speech, actions on Information Theory, pp. 260{269, April 1967. and Signal Processing, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3043{3054, December 71] Lippmann R. P. and Gold B., \Neural-net classiers useful for 1992. speech recognition," in Proceedings of the IEEE First Interna- 51] Y. LeCun, L. D. Jackel, L. Bottou, A. Brunot, C. Cortes, J. S. tional Conference on Neural Networks, San Diego, June 1987, Denker, H. Drucker, I. Guyon, U. A. Muller, E. Sackinger, pp. 417{422. P. Simard, and V. N. Vapnik, \Comparison of learning al- 72] H. Sakoe, R. Isotani, K. Yoshida, K. Iso, and T. Watan- gorithms for handwritten digit recognition," in International abe, \Speaker-independent word recognition using dynamic Conference on Articial Neural Networks, F. Fogelman and programming neural networks," in International Conference P. Gallinari, Eds., Paris, 1995, pp. 53{60, EC2 & Cie. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Glasgow, 1989, 52] I Guyon, I. Poujaud, L. Personnaz, G. Dreyfus, J. Denker, and pp. 29{32. Y. LeCun, \Comparing di erent neural net architectures for 73] J. S. Bridle, \Alphanets: a recurrent `neural' network archi- classifying handwritten digits," in Proc. of IJCNN, Washing- tecture with a hidden markov model interpretation," Speech ton DC. 1989, vol. II, pp. 127{132, IEEE. Communication, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 815{819, 1990. 53] R. Ott, \construction of quadratic polynomial classiers," 74] M. A. Franzini, K. F. Lee, and A. H. Waibel, \Connectionist in Proc. of International Conference on Pattern Recognition. viterbi training: a new hybrid method for continuous speech 1976, pp. 161{165, IEEE. recognition," in International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, 54] J. Schurmann, \A multi-font word recognition system for postal and Signal Processing, Albuquerque, NM, 1990, pp. 425{428. address reading," IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. C-27, 75] L. T. Niles and H. F. Silverman, \Combining hidden markov no. 8, pp. 721{732, August 1978. models and neural network classiers," in International Con- 55] Y. Lee, \Handwritten digit recognition using k-nearest neigh- ference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Albu- bor, radial-basis functions, and backpropagation neural net- querque, NM, 1990, pp. 417{420. works," Neural Computation, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 440{449, 1991. 76] X. Driancourt and L. Bottou, \MLP, LVQ and DP: Compari- 56] D. Saad and S. A. Solla, \Dynamics of on-line gradient de- son & cooperation," in Proceedings of the International Joint scent learning for multilayer neural networks," in Advances in Conference on Neural Networks, Seattle, 1991, vol. 2, pp. 815{ Neural Information Processing Systems, David S. Touretzky, 819. Michael C. Mozer, and Michael E. Hasselmo, Eds. 1996, vol. 8, 77] Y. Bengio, R. De Mori, G. Flammia, and R. Kompe, \Global pp. 302{308, The MIT Press, Cambridge. optimization of a neural network-hidden Markov model hy- 57] G. Cybenko, \Approximation by superpositions of sigmoidal brid," IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 3, no. 2, functions," Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems, vol. pp. 252{259, 1992. 2, no. 4, pp. 303{314, 1989. 78] P. Ha ner and A. H. Waibel, \Multi-state time-delay neural 58] L. Bottou and V. N. Vapnik, \Local learning algorithms," Neu- networks for continuous speech recognition," in Advances in ral Computation, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 888{900, 1992. Neural Information Processing Systems. 1992, vol. 4, pp. 579{ 59] R. E. Schapire, \The strength of weak learnability," Machine 588, Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo. Learning, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 197{227, 1990. 79] Y. Bengio, , P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, \Learning long-term 60] H. Drucker, R. Schapire, and P. Simard, \Improving perfor- dependencies with gradient descent is di!cult," IEEE Trans- mance in neural networks using a boosting algorithm," in Ad- actions on Neural Networks, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157{166, March vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 5, S. J. Han- 1994, Special Issue on Recurrent Neural Network. PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 45 80] T. Kohonen, G. Barna, and R. Chrisley, \Statistical pattern Lippmann, Eds., Denver, CO, 1992, pp. 175{182, Morgan Kauf- recognition with neural network: Benchmarking studies," in mann. Proceedings of the IEEE Second International Conference on 100] F. C. N. Pereira and M. Riley, \Speech recognition by compo- Neural Networks, San Diego, 1988, vol. 1, pp. 61{68. sition of weighted nite automata," in Finite-State Devices for 81] P. Ha ner, \Connectionist speech recognition with a global Natural Langue Processing, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997, MMI algorithm," in EUROSPEECH'93, 3rd European Confer- MIT Press. ence on Speech Communication and Technology, Berlin, Sept. 101] M. Mohri, \Finite-state transducers in language and speech 1993. processing," Computational Linguistics, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 269{ 82] J. S. Denker and C. J. Burges, \Image segmentation and recog- 311, 1997. nition," in The Mathematics of Induction. 1995, Addison Wes- 102] I. Guyon, M. Schenkel, and J. Denker, \Overview and syn- ley. thesis of on-line cursive handwriting recognition techniques," 83] L. Bottou, Une Approche theorique de l'Apprentissage Connex- in Handbook on Optical Character Recognition and Document ionniste: Applications a la Reconnaissance de la Parole, Ph.D. Image Analysis, P. S. P. Wang and Bunke H., Eds. 1996, World thesis, Universite de Paris XI, 91405 Orsay cedex, France, 1991. Scientic. 84] M. Rahim, Y. Bengio, and Y. LeCun, \Discriminative feature 103] M. Mohri and M. Riley, \Weighted determinization and min- and model design for automatic speech recognition," in Proc. imization for large vocabulary recognition," in Proceedings of of Eurospeech, Rhodes, Greece, 1997. Eurospeech '97, Rhodes, Greece, September 1997, pp. 131{134. 85] U. Bodenhausen, S. Manke, and A. Waibel, \Connectionist ar- 104] Y. Bengio and P. Frasconi, \An input/output HMM architec- chitectural learning for high performance character and speech ture," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, recognition," in International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, G. Tesauro, D Touretzky, and T. Leen, Eds. 1996, vol. 7, pp. and Signal Processing, Minneapolis, 1993, vol. 1, pp. 625{628. 427{434, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 86] F. Pereira, M. Riley, and R. Sproat, \Weighted rational trans- 105] Y. Bengio and P. Frasconi, \Input/Output HMMs for sequence ductions and their application to human language processing," processing," IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 7, in ARPA Natural Language Processing workshop, 1994. no. 5, pp. 1231{1249, 1996. 87] M. Lades, J. C. Vorbruggen, J. Buhmann, and C. von der Mals- 106] M. Mohri, F. C. N. Pereira, and M. Riley, A rational design burg, \Distortion invariant object recognition in the dynamic for a weighted nite-state transducer library, Lecture Notes in link architecture," IEEE Trans. Comp., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. Computer Science. Springer Verlag, 1997. 300{311, 1993. 107] M. Rahim, C. H. Lee, and B. H. Juang, \Discriminative ut- 88] B. Boser, E. Sackinger, J. Bromley, Y. LeCun, and L. Jackel, terance verication for connected digits recognition," IEEE \An analog neural network processor with programmable topol- Trans. on Speech & Audio Proc., vol. 5, pp. 266{277, 1997. ogy," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 108] M. Rahim, Y. Bengio, and Y. LeCun, \Discriminative feature 2017{2025, December 1991. and model design for automatic speech recognition," in Eu- 89] M. Schenkel, H. Weissman, I. Guyon, C. Nohl, and D. Hender- rospeech '97, Rhodes, Greece, 1997, pp. 75{78. son, \Recognition-based segmentation of on-line hand-printed 109] S. Bengio and Y. Bengio, \An EM algorithm for asynchronous words," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems input/output hidden Markov models," in International Con- 5, S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles, Eds., Denver, ference On Neural Information Processing, L. Xu, Ed., Hong- CO, 1993, pp. 723{730. Kong, 1996, pp. 328{334. 90] C. Dugast, L. Devillers, and X. Aubert, \Combining TDNN 110] C. Tappert, C. Suen, and T. Wakahara, \The state of the and HMM in a hybrid system for improved continuous-speech art in on-line handwriting recognition," IEEE Transactions on recognition," IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Pro- Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. cessing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 217{224, 1994. 787{808, 1990. 91] Ofer Matan, Henry S. Baird, Jane Bromley, Christopher J. C. 111] S. Manke and U. Bodenhausen, \A connectionist recognizer for Burges, John S. Denker, Lawrence D. Jackel, Yann Le Cun, Ed- on-line cursive handwriting recognition," in International Con- win P. D. Pednault, William D. Sattereld, Charles E. Stenard, ference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Adelaide, and Timothy J. Thompson, \Reading handwritten digits: A 1994, vol. 2, pp. 633{636. ZIP code recognition system," Computer, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 112] M. Gilloux and M. Leroux, \Recognition of cursive script 59{62, July 1992. amounts on postal checks," in European Conference dedicated 92] Y. Bengio and Y. Le Cun, \Word normalization for on-line to Postal Technologies, Nantes, France, June 1993, pp. 705{ handwritten word recognition," in Proc. of the International 712. Conference on Pattern Recognition, IAPR, Ed., Jerusalem, 113] D. Guillevic and C. Y. Suen, \Cursive script recognition applied 1994, IEEE. to the processing of bank checks," in Int. Conf. on Document 93] R. Vaillant, C. Monrocq, and Y. LeCun, \Original approach Analysis and Recognition, Montreal, Canada, August 1995, pp. for the localization of objects in images," IEE Proc on Vision, 11{14. Image, and Signal Processing, vol. 141, no. 4, pp. 245{250, 114] L. Lam, C. Y. Suen, D. Guillevic, N. W. Strathy, M. Cheriet, August 1994. K. Liu, and J. N. Said, \Automatic processing of information 94] R. Wolf and J. Platt, \Postal address block location using a on checks," in Int. Conf. on Systems, Man & Cybernetics, convolutional locator network," in Advances in Neural Infor- Vancouver, Canada, October 1995, pp. 2353{2358. mation Processing Systems 6, J. D. Cowan, G. Tesauro, and 115] C. J. C. Burges, J. I. Ben, J. S. Denker, Y. LeCun, and C. R. J. Alspector, Eds. 1994, pp. 745{752, Morgan Kaufmann Pub- Nohl, \O line recognition of handwritten postal words using lishers, San Mateo, CA. neural networks," Int. Journal of Pattern Recognition and Ar- 95] S. Nowlan and J. Platt, \A convolutional neural network hand ticial Intelligence, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 689, 1993, Special Issue tracker," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys- on Applications of Neural Networks to Pattern Recognition (I. tems 7, G. Tesauro, D. Touretzky, and T. Leen, Eds., San Ma- Guyon Ed.). teo, CA, 1995, pp. 901{908, Morgan Kaufmann. 116] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, D. Henderson, A. Weisbuch, H. Weiss- 96] H. A. Rowley, S. Baluja, and T. Kanade, \Neural network- man, and Jackel. L., \On-line handwriting recognition with based face detection," in Proceedings of CVPR'96. 1996, pp. neural networks: spatial representation versus temporal repre- 203{208, IEEE Computer Society Press. sentation.," in Proc. International Conference on handwriting 97] E. Osuna, R. Freund, and F. Girosi, \Training support vector and drawing. 1993, Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommu- machines: an application to face detection," in Proceedings of nications. CVPR'96. 1997, pp. 130{136, IEEE Computer Society Press. 117] U. Muller, A. Gunzinger, and W. Guggenbuhl, \Fast neural 98] H. Bourlard and C. J. Wellekens, \Links between Markov mod- net simulation with a DSP processor array," IEEE Trans. on els and multilayer perceptrons," in Advances in Neural Infor- Neural Networks, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 203{213, 1995. mation Processing Systems, D. Touretzky, Ed., Denver, 1989, 118] R. Battiti, \First- and second-order methods for learning: Be- vol. 1, pp. 186{187, Morgan-Kaufmann. tween steepest descent and newton's method.," Neural Com- 99] Y. Bengio, R. De Mori, G. Flammia, and R. Kompe, \Neu- putation, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 141{166, 1992. ral network - gaussian mixture hybrid for speech recognition 119] A. H. Kramer and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, \E!cient par- or density estimation," in Advances in Neural Information allel learning algorithms for neural networks," in Advances in Processing Systems 4, J. E. Moody, S. J. Hanson, and R. P. Neural Information Processing Systems, D.S. Touretzky, Ed., PROC. OF THE IEEE, NOVEMBER 1998 46 Denver 1988, 1989, vol. 1, pp. 40{48, Morgan Kaufmann, San Yoshua Bengio Yoshua Bengio received his Mateo. B.Eng. in electrical engineering in 1986 from 120] M. Moller, Ecient Training of Feed-Forward Neural Net- McGill University. He also received a M.Sc. works, Ph.D. thesis, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, and a Ph.D. in computer science from McGill 1993. University in 1988 and 1991 respectively. In 121] S. Becker and Y. LeCun, \Improving the convergence of back- 1991-1992 he was a post-doctoral fellow at the propagation learning with second-order methods," Tech. Rep. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In 1992 CRG-TR-88-5, University of Toronto Connectionist Research he joined AT&T Bell Laboratories, which later Group, September 1988. became AT&T Labs-Research. In 1993 he joined the faculty of the computer science de- partment of the Universite de Montreal where he is now an associate professor. Since his rst work on neural net- works in 1986, his research interests have been centered around learn- ing algorithms especially for data with a sequential or spatial nature, such as speech, handwriting, and time-series. Yann LeCun Yann LeCun received a Patrick Ha ner Patrick Ha ner graduated Dipl^ome d'Ingenieur from the Ecole Superieure from Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France in d'Ingenieur en Electrotechnique et Electron- 1987 and from Ecole Nationale Superieure des ique, Paris in 1983, and a PhD in Computer Telecommunications (ENST), Paris, France in Science from the Universite Pierre et Marie 1989. He received his Ph.D in speech and sig- Curie, Paris, in 1987, during which he proposed nal processing from ENST in 1994. In 1988 an early version of the back-propagation learn- and 1990, he worked with Alex Waibel on the ing algorithm for neural networks. He then design of the TDNN and the MS-TDNN ar- joined the Department of Computer Science at chitectures at ATR (Japan) and Carnegie Mel- the University of Toronto as a research asso- lon University. From 1989 to 1995, as a re- ciate. In 1988, he joined the Adaptive Systems search scientist for CNET/France-Telecom in Research Department at AT&T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, NJ, Lannion, France, he developed connectionist learning algorithms for where he worked among other thing on neural networks, machine telephone speech recognition. In 1995, he joined AT&T Bell Labora- learning, and handwriting recognition. Following AT&T's second tories and worked on the application of Optical Character Recognition breakup in 1996, he became head of the Image Processing Services and transducers to the processing of nancial documents. In 1997, he Research Department at AT&T Labs-Research. joined the Image Processing Services Research Department at AT&T He is serving on the board of the Machine Learning Journal, and Labs-Research. His research interests include statistical and connec- has served as associate editor of the IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks. tionist models for sequence recognition, machine learning, speech and He is general chair of the "Machines that Learn" workshop held every image recognition, and information theory. year since 1986 in Snowbird, Utah. He has served as program co-chair of IJCNN 89, INNC 90, NIPS 90,94, and 95. He is a member of the IEEE Neural Network for Signal Processing Technical Committee. He has published over 70 technical papers and book chapters on neural networks, machine learning, pattern recognition, handwriting recognition, document understanding, image processing, VLSI design, and information theory. In addition to the above topics, his current interests include video-based user interfaces, image compression, and content-based indexing of multimedia material. Leon Bottou Leon Bottou received a Dipl^ome from Ecole Polytechnique, Paris in 1987, a Magist$ere en Mathematiques Fondamentales et Appliquees et Informatiques from Ecole Nor- male Superieure, Paris in 1988, and a PhD in Computer Science from Universite de Paris- Sud in 1991, during which he worked on speech recognition and proposed a framework for stochastic gradient learning and global train- ing. He then joined the Adaptive Systems Re- search Department at AT&T Bell Laboratories where he worked on neural network, statistical learning theory and local learning algorithms. He returned to France in 1992 as a research engineer at ONERA. He then became chairman of Neuristique S.A., a company making neural network simulators and tra!c forecast- ing software. He eventually came back to AT&T Bell Laboratories in 1995 where he worked on graph transformer networks for optical character recognition. He is now a member of the Image Process- ing Services Research Department at AT&T Labs-Research. Besides learning algorithms, his current interests include arithmetic coding, image compression and indexing. 